

============================================================
TOPIC: SEPSIS TREATMENT
============================================================
1. BMJ. 2016 May 23;353:i1585. doi: 10.1136/bmj.i1585.

Sepsis: pathophysiology and clinical management.

Gotts JE(1), Matthay MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine and Anesthesia, Cardiovascular Research Institute, 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143-0624, USA.
(2)Departments of Medicine and Anesthesia, Cardiovascular Research Institute, 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143-0624, USA 
Michael.matthay@ucsf.edu.

Sepsis, severe sepsis, and septic shock represent increasingly severe systemic 
inflammatory responses to infection. Sepsis is common in the aging population, 
and it disproportionately affects patients with cancer and underlying 
immunosuppression. In its most severe form, sepsis causes multiple organ 
dysfunction that can produce a state of chronic critical illness characterized 
by severe immune dysfunction and catabolism. Much has been learnt about the 
pathogenesis of sepsis at the molecular, cell, and intact organ level. Despite 
uncertainties in hemodynamic management and several treatments that have failed 
in clinical trials, investigational therapies increasingly target sepsis induced 
organ and immune dysfunction. Outcomes in sepsis have greatly improved overall, 
probably because of an enhanced focus on early diagnosis and fluid 
resuscitation, the rapid delivery of effective antibiotics, and other 
improvements in supportive care for critically ill patients. These improvements 
include lung protective ventilation, more judicious use of blood products, and 
strategies to reduce nosocomial infections.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.i1585
PMID: 27217054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Front Immunol. 2025 Feb 6;16:1546474. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2025.1546474. 
eCollection 2025.

Sepsis subphenotypes: bridging the gaps in sepsis treatment strategies.

Zhang X(1), Zhang W(2), Zhang H(1), Liao X(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine, West China Hospital, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(2)Institute of Critical Care Medicine, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and 
Cancer Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(3)Department of Critical Care Medicine, West China Tianfu Hospital, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

Sepsis, a heterogeneous illness produced by a dysregulated host response to 
infection, remains a severe mortality risk. Recent discoveries in sepsis 
research have stressed phenotyping as a feasible strategy for tackling 
heterogeneity and enhancing therapy precision. Sepsis phenotyping has moved from 
traditional stratifications based on severity and prognosis to dynamic, 
phenotype-driven therapeutic options. This review covers recent progress in 
connecting sepsis subgroups to personalized treatments, with a focus on 
phenotype-based therapeutic predictions and decision-support systems. Despite 
ongoing challenges, such as standardizing phenotyping frameworks and 
incorporating findings into clinical practice, this topic has enormous promise. 
By investigating phenotypic variation in therapy responses, we hope to uncover 
new biomarkers and phenotype-driven therapeutic solutions, laying the groundwork 
for more effective therapies and, ultimately improving patient outcomes.

Copyright © 2025 Zhang, Zhang, Zhang and Liao.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2025.1546474
PMCID: PMC11862915
PMID: 40013154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


3. Annu Rev Physiol. 2022 Feb 10;84:157-181. doi: 
10.1146/annurev-physiol-061121-040214. Epub 2021 Oct 27.

Sepsis-Induced Immunosuppression.

Torres LK(1), Pickkers P(2), van der Poll T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, New 
York-Presbyterian Hospital-Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA; email: 
lkt9003@med.cornell.edu.
(2)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands; email: peter.pickkers@radboudumc.nl.
(3)Center of Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Division of Infectious 
Diseases, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; email: t.vanderpoll@amsterdamumc.nl.

Sepsis is expected to have a substantial impact on public health and cost as its 
prevalence increases. Factors contributing to increased prevalence include a 
progressively aging population, advances in the use of immunomodulatory agents 
to treat a rising number of diseases, and immune-suppressing therapies in organ 
transplant recipients and cancer patients. It is now recognized that sepsis is 
associated with profound and sustained immunosuppression, which has been 
implicated as a predisposing factor in the increased susceptibility of patients 
to secondary infections and mortality. In this review, we discuss mechanisms of 
sepsis-induced immunosuppression and biomarkers that identify a state of 
impaired immunity. We also highlight immune-enhancing strategies that have been 
evaluated in patients with sepsis, as well as therapeutics under current 
investigation. Finally, we describe future challenges and the need for a new 
treatment paradigm, integrating predictive enrichment with patient factors that 
may guide the future selection of tailored immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-physiol-061121-040214
PMID: 34705481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Intensive Care Med. 2025 Apr;51(4):756-768. doi: 10.1007/s00134-025-07873-6. 
Epub 2025 Mar 31.

Sepsis subphenotypes, theragnostics and personalized sepsis care.

Antcliffe DB(1)(2), Burrell A(3), Boyle AJ(4)(5), Gordon AC(6), McAuley 
DF(4)(5), Silversides J(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Anaesthetics, Pain Medicine and Intensive Care, Department of 
Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, London, UK. 
d.antcliffe@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Intensive Care Unit, Charing Cross Hospital, Imperial College Healthcare NHS 
Trust, London, UK. d.antcliffe@imperial.ac.uk.
(3)Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Research Centre (ANZIC-RC), Dept. 
of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne, 
Australia.
(4)Wellcome-Wolfson Institute for Experimental Medicine, Queen's University 
Belfast, 97 Lisburn Road, Belfast, Northern Ireland.
(5)Department of Critical Care, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast, 
UK.
(6)Division of Anaesthetics, Pain Medicine and Intensive Care, Department of 
Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, London, UK.

Heterogeneity between critically ill patients with sepsis is a major barrier to 
the discovery of effective therapies. The use of machine learning techniques, 
coupled with improved understanding of sepsis biology, has led to the 
identification of patient subphenotypes. This exciting development may help 
overcome the problem of patient heterogeneity and lead to the identification of 
patient subgroups with treatable traits. Re-analyses of completed clinical 
trials have demonstrated that patients with different subphenotypes may respond 
differently to treatments. This suggests that future clinical trials that take a 
precision medicine approach will have a higher likelihood of identifying 
effective therapeutics for patients based on their subphenotype. In this review, 
we describe the emerging subphenotypes identified in the critically ill and 
outline the promising immune modulation therapies which could have a beneficial 
treatment effect within some of these subphenotypes. Furthermore, we will also 
highlight how bringing subphenotype identification to the bedside could enable a 
new generation of precision-medicine clinical trials.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00134-025-07873-6
PMCID: PMC12055953
PMID: 40163135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflicts of interest: ACG reports 
that outside of this work he has received grant funding from the National 
Institute for Health and Care Research. AB reports grant funding from the NHMRC. 
AJB reports grant funding from the Belfast Health and Social Care Trust Charity 
and support from ViroGates. ACG reports that outside of this work he has 
received consulting fees from AstraZeneca, Beckman Coulter, and VVB Bio, speaker 
fees from Fresenius Kabi and grant support from the NIHR HTA programme. ACG is 
the director of the NIHR National Research Collaboration Programme. Outside the 
submitted work, DFM reports personal fees for consultancy from Bayer, GSK, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Novartis and SOBI and for being a member of the 
data monitoring and ethics committee for Vir Biotechnology and Faron studies and 
as an educational seminar speaker for GSK. DFM has received funding to his 
institution from the NIHR, MRC, Wellcome Trust, Innovate UK, Northern Ireland 
Health and Social Care Research and Development Office, Novavax and Randox. In 
addition, DFM is a named inventor on a patent US8962032 covering the use of 
sialic acid-bearing nanoparticles as anti-inflammatory agents issued to his 
institution. DFM was a Director of Research for the Intensive Care Society and 
is the Director for the MRC/NIHR EME Programme and is the Scientific Director 
for NIHR Programmes. All other authors declare no conflicts of interest.


5. Front Immunol. 2025 Apr 29;16:1577105. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2025.1577105. 
eCollection 2025.

Sepsis-induced immunosuppression: mechanisms, biomarkers and immunotherapy.

Gao X(1)(2), Cai S(1)(2), Li X(1)(2), Wu G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Zhongda Hospital, Southeast 
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Medical School of Southeast University, 
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

Sepsis, a life-threatening organ dysfunction resulting from a dysregulated host 
response to infection, initiates a complex immune response that varies over 
time, characterized by sustained excessive inflammation and immunosuppression. 
Sepsis-induced immunosuppression is now recognized as a major cause of septic 
death, and identifying effective strategies to counteract it poses a significant 
challenge. This immunosuppression results from the disruption of immune 
homeostasis, characterized by the abnormal death of immune effector cells, 
hyperproliferation of immune suppressor cells, release of anti-inflammatory 
cytokines, and expression of immune checkpoints. Preclinical studies targeting 
immunosuppression, particularly with immune checkpoint inhibitors, have shown 
promise in reversing immunocyte dysfunctions and establishing host resistance to 
pathogens. Here, our review highlights the mechanisms of sepsis-induced 
immunosuppression and current diagnostic biomarkers, as well as immune-enhancing 
strategies evaluated in septic patients and therapeutics under investigation.

Copyright © 2025 Gao, Cai, Li and Wu.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2025.1577105
PMCID: PMC12069044
PMID: 40364841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be constructed as a potential conflict of interest.


6. Cell Rep Med. 2022 Nov 15;3(11):100817. doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2022.100817.

Toward personalized immunotherapy in sepsis: The PROVIDE randomized clinical 
trial.

Leventogiannis K(1), Kyriazopoulou E(1), Antonakos N(1), Kotsaki A(1), Tsangaris 
I(2), Markopoulou D(3), Grondman I(4), Rovina N(5), Theodorou V(6), Antoniadou 
E(7), Koutsodimitropoulos I(8), Dalekos G(9), Vlachogianni G(10), Akinosoglou 
K(11), Koulouras V(12), Komnos A(13), Kontopoulou T(14), Prekates A(15), 
Koutsoukou A(5), van der Meer JWM(4), Dimopoulos G(5), Kyprianou M(1), Netea 
MG(16), Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ(17).

Author information:
(1)4(th) Department of Internal Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University 
of Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece.
(2)2(nd) Department of Critical Care Medicine, National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece.
(3)Intensive Care Unit, KAT Kifisia General Hospital, Kifisia, Greece.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(5)1(st) Department of Pulmonary Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University 
of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(6)Department of Critical Care Medicine, University of Thrace, Alexandroupolis, 
Greece.
(7)Intensive Care Unit, "G. Gennimatas" Thessaloniki General Hospital, 
Thessaloniki, Greece.
(8)Intensive Care Unit, Latseion Elefsis General Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(9)Department of Medicine and Research Laboratory of Internal Medicine, National 
Expertise Center of Greece in Autoimmune Liver Diseases, Full Member of the 
European Reference Network on Hepatological Disases (ERN RARE-LIVER), General 
University Hospital of Larissa, 41110 Larissa, Greece.
(10)Intensive Care Unit, "Aghios Dimitrios" Thessaloniki General Hospital, 
Thessaloniki, Greece.
(11)Department of Internal Medicine, Patras University Hospital, Patra, Greece.
(12)Department of Critical Care Medicine, University of Ioannina, Ioannina, 
Greece.
(13)Intensive Care Unit, Larissa General Hospital, Larissa, Greece.
(14)5th Department of Internal Medicine, Evangelismos Athens General Hospital, 
Athens, Greece.
(15)Intensive Care Unit, Tzaneion Piraeus General Hospital, Piraeus, Greece.
(16)Department of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Department of 
Immunology and Metabolism, Life and Medical Sciences Institute (LIMES), 
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(17)4(th) Department of Internal Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University 
of Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece. Electronic address: 
egiamarel@med.uoa.gr.

Comment in
    Cell Rep Med. 2022 Nov 15;3(11):100823. doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2022.100823.

The state of immune activation may guide targeted immunotherapy in sepsis. In a 
double-blind, double-dummy randomized clinical study, 240 patients with sepsis 
due to lung infection, bacteremia, or acute cholangitis were subjected to 
measurements of serum ferritin and HLA-DR/CD14. Patients with macrophage 
activation-like syndrome (MALS) or immunoparalysis were randomized to treatment 
with anakinra or recombinant interferon-gamma or placebo. Twenty-eight-day 
mortality was the primary endpoint; sepsis immune classification was the 
secondary endpoint. Using ferritin >4,420 ng/mL and <5,000 HLA-DR 
receptors/monocytes as biomarkers, patients were classified into MALS (20.0%), 
immunoparalysis (42.9%), and intermediate (37.1%). Mortality was 79.1%, 66.9%, 
and 41.6%, respectively. Survival after 7 days with SOFA score decrease was 
achieved in 42.9% of patients of the immunotherapy arm and 10.0% of the placebo 
arm (p = 0.042). Three independent immune classification strata are recognized 
in sepsis. MALS and immunoparalysis are proposed as stratification for 
personalized adjuvant immunotherapy. Clinicaltrials.gov registration 
NCT03332225.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2022.100817
PMCID: PMC9729870
PMID: 36384100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests G.D. has acted as 
Advisor/Lecturer for Abbvie, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Gilead, Novartis, Roche, 
Amgen, MSD, Janssen, Ipsen, Genkyotex, Sobi, and Pfizer; has received grant 
support from Bristol-Myers Squib, Gilead, Roche, Janssen, Abbvie, and Bayer; and 
was or is currently principal investigator in national and international 
protocols sponsored by Abbvie, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, Gilead, Novo 
Nordisk, Genkyotex, Regulus Therapeutics Inc, Tiziana Life Sciences, Bayer, 
Astellas, Ipsen, Pfizer, Amyndas Pharamaceuticals, CymaBay Therapeutics Inc., 
and Roche. M.G.N. is supported by an ERC Advanced Grant (#833247) and a Spinoza 
grant of the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research. He is a 
scientific founder of TTxD and has received independent educational grants from 
TTxD, GSK, Ono Pharma, and ViiV HealthCare. E.J.G.-B. has received honoraria 
from Abbott CH, bioMérieux, ThermoFisherBrahms GmbH, GSK, InflaRx GmbH, Sobi, 
and XBiotech Inc; independent educational grants from Abbott CH, AxisShield, 
bioMérieux Inc, InflaRx GmbH, Johnson & Johnson, MSD, Sobi, and XBiotech Inc.; 
and funding from the Horizon2020 Marie-Curie Project European Sepsis Academy 
(granted to the National and Kapodistrian University of Athens), the Horizon 
2020 European Grants ImmunoSep and RISCinCOVID (granted to the Hellenic 
Institute for the Study of Sepsis), and the Horizon Health European Grant 
EPIC-CROWN-2 (granted to the Hellenic Institute for the Study of Sepsis).


7. Crit Care. 2020 Jun 1;24(1):278. doi: 10.1186/s13054-020-02989-1.

The gut microbiome's role in the development, maintenance, and outcomes of 
sepsis.

Adelman MW(1), Woodworth MH(2), Langelier C(3), Busch LM(4), Kempker JA(5), 
Kraft CS(2)(6), Martin GS(5)(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Emory University 
School of Medicine, 49 Jesse Hill Jr. Drive, Atlanta, GA, 30303, USA. 
mwadelm@emory.edu.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Emory University 
School of Medicine, 49 Jesse Hill Jr. Drive, Atlanta, GA, 30303, USA.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of 
California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Critical Care Medicine Department, National Institutes of Health Clinical 
Center, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(5)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department 
of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(7)Emory Critical Care Center, Emory Healthcare, Atlanta, GA, USA.

The gut microbiome regulates a number of homeostatic mechanisms in the healthy 
host including immune function and gut barrier protection. Loss of normal gut 
microbial structure and function has been associated with diseases as diverse as 
Clostridioides difficile infection, asthma, and epilepsy. Recent evidence has 
also demonstrated a link between the gut microbiome and sepsis. In this review, 
we focus on three key areas of the interaction between the gut microbiome and 
sepsis. First, prior to sepsis onset, gut microbiome alteration increases sepsis 
susceptibility through several mechanisms, including (a) allowing for expansion 
of pathogenic intestinal bacteria, (b) priming the immune system for a robust 
pro-inflammatory response, and (c) decreasing production of beneficial microbial 
products such as short-chain fatty acids. Second, once sepsis is established, 
gut microbiome disruption worsens and increases susceptibility to end-organ 
dysfunction. Third, there is limited evidence that microbiome-based 
therapeutics, including probiotics and selective digestive decontamination, may 
decrease sepsis risk and improve sepsis outcomes in select patient populations, 
but concerns about safety have limited uptake. Case reports of a different 
microbiome-based therapy, fecal microbiota transplantation, have shown 
correlation with gut microbial structure restoration and decreased inflammatory 
response, but these results require further validation. While much of the 
evidence linking the gut microbiome and sepsis has been established in 
pre-clinical studies, clinical evidence is lacking in many areas. To address 
this, we outline a potential research agenda for further investigating the 
interaction between the gut microbiome and sepsis.

DOI: 10.1186/s13054-020-02989-1
PMCID: PMC7266132
PMID: 32487252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JAK has served as a consultant to Grifols, Inc. 
CSK is on the scientific advisory board of Rebiotix.


8. Burns. 2023 Nov;49(7):1487-1524. doi: 10.1016/j.burns.2023.05.003. Epub 2023
May  6.

Surviving Sepsis After Burn Campaign.

Greenhalgh DG(1), Hill DM(2), Burmeister DM(3), Gus EI(4), Cleland H(5), 
Padiglione A(5), Holden D(5), Huss F(6), Chew MS(7), Kubasiak JC(8), Burrell 
A(9), Manzanares W(10), Gómez MC(11), Yoshimura Y(12), Sjöberg F(7), Xie WG(13), 
Egipto P(14), Lavrentieva A(15), Jain A(16), Miranda-Altamirano A(17), Raby 
E(18), Aramendi I(19), Sen S(20), Chung KK(3), Alvarez RJQ(21), Han C(22), 
Matsushima A(23), Elmasry M(24), Liu Y(25), Donoso CS(26), Bolgiani A(27), 
Johnson LS(28), Vana LPM(29), de Romero RVD(30), Allorto N(31), Abesamis G(32), 
Luna VN(33), Gragnani A(29), González CB(34), Basilico H(35), Wood F(36), Jeng 
J(37), Li A(5), Singer M(38), Luo G(39), Palmieri T(20), Kahn S(40), Joe V(37), 
Cartotto R(41).

Author information:
(1)Department of Burns, Shriners Children's Northern California and Department 
of Surgery, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA. Electronic 
address: dggreenhalgh@ucdavis.edu.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacy & Translational Scre have been several 
studies that have evaluatedience, College of Pharmacy, University of Tennessee, 
Health Science Center; Memphis, TN, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Division of Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery, The Hospital for Sick Children; 
Department of Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(5)Department of Surgery, Monash University and Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, 
Australia.
(6)Department of Surgical Sciences, Plastic Surgery, Uppsala University/Burn 
Center, Department of Plastic and Maxillofacial Surgery, Uppsala University 
Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.
(7)Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, Biomedical and Clinical 
Sciences, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
(8)Department of Surgery, Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, IL, USA.
(9)Department of Epidemiology and Preventative Medicine, Monash University and 
Alfred Hospital, Intensive Care Research Center (ANZIC-RC), Melbourne, 
Australia.
(10)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Universidad de la República (UdelaR), 
Montevideo, Uruguay.
(11)Division of Intensive Care and Critical Medicine, Centro Nacional de 
Investigacion y Atencion de Quemados (CENIAQ), National Rehabilitation 
Institute, LGII, Mexico.
(12)Department of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Hachinohe City Hospital, 
Hachinohe, Japan.
(13)Institute of Burns, Tongren Hospital of Wuhan University (Wuhan Third 
Hospital), Wuhan, China.
(14)Centro Hospitalar e Universitário São João - Burn Unit, Porto, Portugal.
(15)A-ICU, Burn-ICU, Papanikolaou Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(16)Arizona Burn Center, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(17)Hospital Civil de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Mexico.
(18)Infectious Diseases Department, Fiona Stanley Hospital, Murdoch, Western 
Australia, Australia.
(19)Centro Nacional de Quemados. Montevideo, Uruguay.
(20)Department of Burns, Shriners Children's Northern California and Department 
of Surgery, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA.
(21)Pediatric Burn Center, Santiago, Dominican Republic.
(22)Department of Burn and Wound Repair, Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang 
University College of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(23)Department of Emergency and Critical Care, Nagoya City University Graduate 
School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.
(24)Department of Hand, Plastic Surgery and Burns, Linköping University, 
Linköping, Sweden.
(25)Department of Burn, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of 
Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(26)Intensive Care Unit for Major Burns, Mutual Security Clinical Hospital, 
Santiago, Chile.
(27)Department of Surgery, Deutsches Hospital, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(28)Department of Surgery, Emory University School of Medicine and Grady Health 
System, Georgia.
(29)Disciplina de Cirurgia Plastica da Escola Paulista de Medicina da 
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(30)Infectious Diseases Department, Pearl F. Ort Burn Unit, Santo Domingo, 
Dominican Republic.
(31)Grey's Hospital Pietermaritzburg Metropolitan Burn Service, University of 
KwaZulu Natal, Pietermaritzburg, South Africa.
(32)Alfredo T. Ramirez Burn Center, Division of Burns, Department of Surgery, 
University of Philippines Manila - Philippine General Hospital, Manila, 
Philippines.
(33)Unidad Michou y Mau Xochimilco for Burnt Children, Secretaria Salud Ciudad 
de México, Mexico.
(34)Department of Pediatrics and Intensive Care, Pediatric Burn Unit, Clinical 
Studies and Clinical Epidemiology Division, Fundación Santa Fe de Bogotá, 
Bogotá, Colombia.
(35)Intensive Care Area - Burn Unit - Pediatric Hospital "Prof. Dr. Juan P. 
Garrahan", Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(36)Department of Surgery, Fiona Stanley Hospital, Murdoch, Western Australia, 
Australia.
(37)Department of Surgery, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA.
(38)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, University College London, London, 
United Kingdom.
(39)Institute of Burn Research, Southwest Hospital, Army (Third Military) 
Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(40)The South Carolina Burn Center, Department of Surgery, Medical University of 
South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.
(41)Department of Surgery, Sunnybrook Medical Center, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: The Surviving Sepsis Campaign was developed to improve outcomes 
for all patients with sepsis. Despite sepsis being the primary cause of death 
after thermal injury, burns have always been excluded from the Surviving Sepsis 
efforts. To improve sepsis outcomes in burn patients, an international group of 
burn experts developed the Surviving Sepsis After Burn Campaign (SSABC) as a 
testable guideline to improve burn sepsis outcomes.
METHODS: The International Society for Burn Injuries (ISBI) reached out to 
regional or national burn organizations to recommend members to participate in 
the program. Two members of the ISBI developed specific "patient/population, 
intervention, comparison and outcome" (PICO) questions that paralleled the 2021 
Surviving Sepsis Campaign [1]. SSABC participants were asked to search the 
current literature and rate its quality for each topic. At the Congress of the 
ISBI, in Guadalajara, Mexico, August 28, 2022, a majority of the participants 
met to create "statements" based on the literature. The "summary statements" 
were then sent to all members for comment with the hope of developing an 80% 
consensus. After four reviews, a consensus statement for each topic was created 
or "no consensus" was reported.
RESULTS: The committee developed sixty statements within fourteen topics that 
provide guidance for the early treatment of sepsis in burn patients. These 
statements should be used to improve the care of sepsis in burn patients. The 
statements should not be considered as "static" comments but should rather be 
used as guidelines for future testing of the best treatments for sepsis in burn 
patients. They should be updated on a regular basis.
CONCLUSION: Members of the burn community from the around the world have 
developed the Surviving Sepsis After Burn Campaign guidelines with the goal of 
improving the outcome of sepsis in burn patients.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd and International Society of Burns Injuries. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.burns.2023.05.003
PMID: 37839919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Kevin Chung is 
Chief Medical Officer for SeaStar Medical, Denver, Colorado. No other author has 
declared a conflict of interest related to the publication.


9. Expert Opin Emerg Drugs. 2016;21(1):27-37. doi: 10.1517/14728214.2016.1132700.
 Epub 2016 Jan 11.

Emerging drugs for the treatment of sepsis.

Heming N(1), Lamothe L(1), Ambrosi X(1), Annane D(1).

Author information:
(1)a General intensive care unit , Raymond Poincaré Hospital (APHP), Laboratory 
of Inflammation and Infection U1173, University of Versailles SQY/INSERM , 
Garches , France.

INTRODUCTION: The incidence of sepsis, the systemic inflammatory response of the 
host to an infectious insult, has steadily increased over past decades. This 
trend is expected to continue. Sepsis is a leading cause of death and disability 
worldwide. Treatment relies on antibiotics associated to source control and 
supportive care. Major progress has been made in the understanding and overall 
management of sepsis. However, there is no specific treatment for sepsis.
AREAS COVERED: We searched PubMed and the ClinicalTrials.gov site for English 
language reports of phase II and III clinical trials pertaining to the field of 
sepsis. The current review provides a summary of promising candidate treatments 
for sepsis. We broadly separated candidate drugs into three distinct categories: 
Blood purification techniques, immunomodulatory drugs and treatments targeting 
other systems including the heart, the endothelium or coagulation.
EXPERT OPINION: Efforts to identify an efficient treatment for sepsis are 
hampered by the broad definition of the syndrome associated with major 
heterogeneity between patients affected by sepsis. The characterization of 
homogeneous groups of patients, through biological or clinical markers is 
unfortunately lacking. Current research remains active. Candidate drugs for 
sepsis include hemoperfusion with polymyxin B coated fibre devices, modulation 
of the immune system with treatments such as hydrocortisone, intravenous 
immunoglobulins, mesenchymal stem cells, GM-CSF or interferon gamma. Candidate 
drugs acting on the cardiovascular system include short acting beta 1 blockers, 
levosimendan or selepressin. Finally, promising strategies, involving monoclonal 
antibodies or protein antagonists, which selectively inhibit bacterial virulence 
factors are being assessed at the bedside. A much awaited and needed specific 
treatment for sepsis will hopefully soon emerge.

DOI: 10.1517/14728214.2016.1132700
PMID: 26751198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2021 May 8;5(5):CD013836. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD013836.pub2.

Antibiotic regimens for late-onset neonatal sepsis.

Korang SK(1), Safi S(1), Nava C(2), Greisen G(3), Gupta M(4), Lausten-Thomsen 
U(5), Jakobsen JC(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Copenhagen Trial Unit, Centre for Clinical Intervention Research, The Capital 
Region of Denmark, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(2)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Ospedale "A. Manzoni", Lecco, Italy.
(3)Department of Neonatology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Neonatology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(5)Pediatric and Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Paris South University Hospitals 
Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, Paris, France.
(6)Cochrane Hepato-Biliary Group, Copenhagen Trial Unit, Centre for Clinical 
Intervention Research, The Capital Region of Denmark, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen 
University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Department of Regional Health Research, The Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.

Update of
    doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD013836.

BACKGROUND: Neonatal sepsis is a major cause of morbidity and mortality. It is 
the third leading cause of neonatal mortality globally constituting 13% of 
overall neonatal mortality. Despite the high burden of neonatal sepsis, 
high-quality evidence in diagnosis and treatment is scarce. Due to the 
diagnostic challenges of sepsis and the relative immunosuppression of the 
newborn, many neonates receive antibiotics for suspected sepsis. Antibiotics 
have become the most used therapeutics in neonatal intensive care units, and 
observational studies in high-income countries suggest that 83% to 94% of 
newborns treated with antibiotics for suspected sepsis have negative blood 
cultures. The last Cochrane Review was updated in 2005. There is a need for an 
updated systematic review assessing the effects of different antibiotic regimens 
for late-onset neonatal sepsis.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the beneficial and harmful effects of different antibiotic 
regimens for late-onset neonatal sepsis.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the following electronic databases: CENTRAL (2021, 
Issue 3); Ovid MEDLINE; Embase Ovid; CINAHL; LILACS; Science Citation Index 
EXPANDED and Conference Proceedings Citation Index - Science on 12 March 2021. 
We also searched clinical trials databases and the reference lists of retrieved 
articles for randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and quasi-RCTs.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included RCTs comparing different antibiotic regimens for 
late-onset neonatal sepsis. We included participants older than 72 hours of life 
at randomisation, suspected or diagnosed with neonatal sepsis, meningitis, 
osteomyelitis, endocarditis, or necrotising enterocolitis. We excluded trials 
that assessed treatment of fungal infections.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Three review authors independently assessed 
studies for inclusion, extracted data, and assessed risk of bias. We used the 
GRADE approach to assess the certainty of evidence. Our primary outcome was 
all-cause mortality, and our secondary outcomes were: serious adverse events, 
respiratory support, circulatory support, nephrotoxicity, neurological 
developmental impairment, necrotising enterocolitis, and ototoxicity. Our 
primary time point of interest was at maximum follow-up.
MAIN RESULTS: We included five RCTs (580 participants). All trials were at high 
risk of bias, and had very low-certainty evidence. The five included trials 
assessed five different comparisons of antibiotics. We did not conduct a 
meta-analysis due to lack of relevant data. Of the five included trials one 
trial compared cefazolin plus amikacin with vancomycin plus amikacin; one trial 
compared ticarcillin plus clavulanic acid with flucloxacillin plus gentamicin; 
one trial compared cloxacillin plus amikacin with cefotaxime plus gentamicin; 
one trial compared meropenem with standard care (ampicillin plus gentamicin or 
cefotaxime plus gentamicin); and one trial compared vancomycin plus gentamicin 
with vancomycin plus aztreonam. None of the five comparisons found any evidence 
of a difference when assessing all-cause mortality, serious adverse events, 
circulatory support, nephrotoxicity, neurological developmental impairment, or 
necrotising enterocolitis; however, none of the trials were near an information 
size that could contribute significantly to the evidence of the comparative 
benefits and risks of any particular antibiotic regimen. None of the trials 
assessed respiratory support or ototoxicity. The benefits and harms of different 
antibiotic regimens remain unclear due to the lack of well-powered trials and 
the high risk of systematic errors.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Current evidence is insufficient to support any antibiotic 
regimen being superior to another. RCTs assessing different antibiotic regimens 
in late-onset neonatal sepsis with low risks of bias are warranted.

Publisher: ANTECEDENTES: La sepsis neonatal es una causa importante de 
morbilidad y mortalidad. Es la tercera causa de mortalidad neonatal a nivel 
mundial y constituye el 13% de la mortalidad neonatal total. A pesar de la 
elevada carga de la sepsis neonatal, la evidencia de alta calidad en el 
diagnóstico y el tratamiento es escasa. Debido a las dificultades de diagnóstico 
de la sepsis y a la relativa inmunosupresión del neonato, muchos reciben 
antibióticos por sospecha de sepsis. Los antibióticos se han convertido en el 
tratamiento más utilizado en las unidades de cuidados intensivos neonatales, y 
los estudios observacionales realizados en países de ingresos altos indican que 
entre el 83% y el 94% de los neonatos tratados con antibióticos por sospecha de 
sepsis tienen hemocultivos negativos. La última revisión Cochrane se actualizó 
en 2005. Se necesita una revisión sistemática actualizada que evalúe los efectos 
de los diferentes regímenes de antibióticos para la sepsis neonatal de inicio 
tardío.
OBJETIVOS: Evaluar los efectos beneficiosos y perjudiciales de diferentes 
regímenes antibióticos para la sepsis neonatal de inicio tardío. MÉTODOS DE 
BÚSQUEDA: Se hicieron búsquedas en las siguientes bases de datos electrónicas: 
CENTRAL (2021, número 3); Ovid MEDLINE; Embase Ovid; CINAHL; LILACS; Science 
Citation Index EXPANDED y Conference Proceedings Citation Index ‐ Science el 12 
de marzo de 2021. También se buscaron ensayos controlados aleatorizados (ECA) y 
cuasialeatorizados en las bases de datos de ensayos clínicos y en las listas de 
referencias de artículos identificados. CRITERIOS DE SELECCIÓN: Se incluyeron 
ECA que compararon diferentes regímenes de antibióticos para la sepsis neonatal 
de inicio tardío. Se incluyeron participantes mayores de 72 horas de vida en el 
momento de la asignación al azar, con sospecha o diagnóstico de sepsis neonatal, 
meningitis, osteomielitis, endocarditis o enterocolitis necrosante. Se 
excluyeron los ensayos que evaluaron el tratamiento de las infecciones 
micóticas. OBTENCIÓN Y ANÁLISIS DE LOS DATOS: Dos autores de la revisión, de 
forma independiente, evaluaron los estudios para inclusión, extrajeron los datos 
y evaluaron el riesgo de sesgo. Se utilizó el método GRADE para evaluar la 
certeza de la evidencia. El desenlace principal fue la mortalidad por todas las 
causas, y los desenlaces secundarios fueron: eventos adversos graves, asistencia 
respiratoria, apoyo circulatorio, nefrotoxicidad, deterioro del desarrollo 
neurológico, enterocolitis necrosante y ototoxicidad. El punto temporal 
principal de interés fue el seguimiento máximo.
RESULTADOS PRINCIPALES: Se incluyeron cinco ECA (580 participantes). Todos los 
ensayos tuvieron alto riesgo de sesgo y evidencia de certeza muy baja. Los cinco 
ensayos incluidos evaluaron cinco comparaciones diferentes de antibióticos. No 
se realizó un metanálisis debido a la falta de datos relevantes. De los cinco 
ensayos incluidos, un ensayo comparó cefazolina más amikacina con vancomicina 
más amikacina; un ensayo comparó ticarcilina más ácido clavulánico con 
flucloxacilina más gentamicina; un ensayo comparó cloxacilina más amikacina con 
cefotaxima más gentamicina; un ensayo comparó meropenem con atención estándar 
(ampicilina más gentamicina o cefotaxima más gentamicina); y un ensayo comparó 
vancomicina más gentamicina con vancomicina más aztreonam. Ninguna de las cinco 
comparaciones encontró evidencia de una diferencia al evaluar la mortalidad por 
todas las causas, los eventos adversos graves, el apoyo circulatorio, la 
nefrotoxicidad, el deterioro del desarrollo neurológico o la enterocolitis 
necrosante; sin embargo, ninguno de los ensayos se acercó a un tamaño de 
información que pudiera contribuir significativamente a la evidencia de los 
beneficios y los riesgos comparativos de cualquier régimen antibiótico en 
particular. Ninguno de los ensayos evaluó la asistencia respiratoria o la 
ototoxicidad. Los efectos beneficiosos y perjudiciales de los diferentes 
regímenes de antibióticos aún no están claros debido a la falta de ensayos con 
un poder estadístico adecuado y al alto riesgo de errores sistemáticos.
CONCLUSIONES DE LOS AUTORES: La evidencia actual no es suficiente para apoyar 
que un régimen de antibióticos sea superior a otro. Se justifica la realización 
de ECA con bajo riesgo de sesgo que evalúen diferentes regímenes antibióticos en 
la sepsis neonatal de inicio tardío.

Copyright © 2021 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD013836.pub2
PMCID: PMC8127057
PMID: 33998665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The project received no funding. SKK: none. SS: 
none. CN: none. MG: none. GG: none. ULT: none. JCJ: none.

============================================================
TOPIC: SEPTIC SHOCK MANAGEMENT
============================================================
1. Intern Emerg Med. 2021 Sep;16(6):1649-1661. doi: 10.1007/s11739-021-02735-7. 
Epub 2021 Apr 22.

Management of sepsis and septic shock in the emergency department.

Gavelli F(1)(2), Castello LM(3)(4), Avanzi GC(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Medicine, Università del Piemonte Orientale UPO, 
Via Solaroli 17, Novara, Italy. francesco.gavelli@uniupo.it.
(2)Emergency Medicine Department, AOU Maggiore Della Carità, Corso Mazzini 18, 
Novara, Italy. francesco.gavelli@uniupo.it.
(3)Department of Translational Medicine, Università del Piemonte Orientale UPO, 
Via Solaroli 17, Novara, Italy.
(4)Emergency Medicine Department, AOU Maggiore Della Carità, Corso Mazzini 18, 
Novara, Italy.

Early management of sepsis and septic shock is crucial for patients' prognosis. 
As the Emergency Department (ED) is the place where the first medical contact 
for septic patients is likely to occur, emergency physicians play an essential 
role in the early phases of patient management, which consists of accurate 
initial diagnosis, resuscitation, and early antibiotic treatment. Since the 
issuing of the Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines in 2016, several studies 
have been published on different aspects of sepsis management, adding a 
substantial amount of new information on the pathophysiology and treatment of 
sepsis and septic shock. In light of this emerging evidence, the present 
narrative review provides a comprehensive account of the recent advances in 
septic patient management in the ED.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11739-021-02735-7
PMCID: PMC8354945
PMID: 33890208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All the authors declare they do not have any 
conflict of interest.


2. Am J Emerg Med. 2025 Apr;90:179-191. doi: 10.1016/j.ajem.2025.01.054. Epub
2025  Jan 22.

Emergency medicine updates: Management of sepsis and septic shock.

Long B(1), Gottlieb M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Brooke Army Medical Center, Fort Sam 
Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: Brit.long@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
IL, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Sepsis is a common condition associated with significant morbidity 
and mortality. Emergency physicians play a key role in the diagnosis and 
management of this condition.
OBJECTIVE: This paper evaluates key evidence-based updates concerning the 
management of sepsis and septic shock for the emergency clinician.
DISCUSSION: Sepsis is a life-threatening syndrome, and rapid diagnosis and 
management are essential. Antimicrobials should be administered as soon as 
possible, as delays are associated with increased mortality. Resuscitation 
targets include mean arterial pressure ≥ 65 mmHg, mental status, capillary 
refill time, lactate, and urine output. Intravenous fluid resuscitation plays an 
integral role in those who are fluid responsive. Balanced crystalloids and 
normal saline are both reasonable options for resuscitation. Early vasopressors 
should be initiated in those who are not fluid-responsive. Norepinephrine is the 
recommended first-line vasopressor, and if hypotension persists, vasopressin 
should be considered, followed by epinephrine. Administration of vasopressors 
through a peripheral 20-gauge or larger intravenous line is safe and effective. 
Steroids such as hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone should be considered in 
those with refractory septic shock.
CONCLUSION: An understanding of the recent updates in the literature concerning 
sepsis and septic shock can assist emergency clinicians and improve the care of 
these patients.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajem.2025.01.054
PMID: 39904062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None. No AI 
program was used in the construction of this manuscript.


3. Cleve Clin J Med. 2020 Jan;87(1):53-64. doi: 10.3949/ccjm.87a.18143. Epub 2020
 Jan 2.

Sepsis and septic shock: Guideline-based management.

Dugar S(1), Choudhary C(1), Duggal A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Critical Care, Respiratory Institute, Cleveland Clinic; 
Clinical Assistant Professor, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine of 
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH.
(2)Department of Critical Care, Respiratory Institute, Cleveland Clinic; 
Assistant Professor, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine of Case Western 
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH duggala2@ccf.org.

Sepsis is a life-threatening organ dysfunction that results from the body's 
response to infection. It requires prompt recognition, appropriate antibiotics, 
careful hemodynamic support, and control of the source of infection. With the 
trend in management moving away from protocolized care in favor of appropriate 
usual care, an understanding of sepsis physiology and best practice guidelines 
is critical.

Copyright © 2020 The Cleveland Clinic Foundation. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.3949/ccjm.87a.18143
PMID: 31990655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Med Clin North Am. 2020 Jul;104(4):573-585. doi: 10.1016/j.mcna.2020.02.011. 
Epub 2020 May 12.

Sepsis and Septic Shock - Basics of diagnosis, pathophysiology and clinical 
decision making.

Font MD(1), Thyagarajan B(2), Khanna AK(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Wake Forest 
Baptist Medical Center, 1, Medical Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, 
USA.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Section on Critical Care Medicine, Wake Forest 
School of Medicine, Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center, 1, Medical Center 
Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Section on Critical Care Medicine, Wake Forest 
School of Medicine, Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center, 1, Medical Center 
Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA; Outcomes Research Consortium, 
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. Electronic address: akhanna@wakehealth.edu.

Sepsis and septic shock are major causes of mortality among hospitalized 
patients. The sepsis state is due to dysregulated host response to infection, 
leading to inflammatory damage to nearly every organ system. Early recognition 
of sepsis and appropriate treatment with antibiotics, fluids, and vasopressors 
is essential to reducing organ system injury and mortality. This review 
summarizes the current understanding of the epidemiology, pathophysiology, 
diagnosis, and treatment of sepsis and septic shock.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcna.2020.02.011
PMID: 32505253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Departmental resources supported this 
work. The authors have nothing to disclose.


5. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2024 Dec;18(12):795-813. doi: 
10.1080/17474124.2024.2443813. Epub 2025 Jan 2.

Revisiting septic shock in cirrhosis: a call for personalized management.

Girish V(1), Maiwall R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatology, Institute of liver and biliary sciences, Delhi, 
India.

INTRODUCTION: Patients with cirrhosis are known to be prone to infections. 
Infections can trigger organ failures and decompensations in cirrhosis. Septic 
shock can increase mortality by fourfold and cause hemodynamic imbalances, 
adding to the already hyperdynamic circulation. Management of septic shock in 
cirrhosis can be tricky due to this complex interplay of altered hemodynamics, 
immune function, and coagulation.
AREAS COVERED: In this review, we explore the pathophysiological basis, 
screening, monitoring and management of septic shock in cirrhosis. We also 
explore novel biomarkers, the growing challenge of multidrug-resistant pathogens 
and novel and adjunctive therapies. Finally, we propose an algorithm for the 
management of septic shock in cirrhosis. We conducted a comprehensive search of 
electronic databases such as PubMed, Web of Science, and Cochrane Library using 
the keywords and MeSH terms like 'septic shock,' 'cirrhosis,' 'liver disease,' 
'sepsis' among others. The search was restricted to peer-reviewed articles in 
English.
EXPERT OPINION: The difficulties in managing septic shock in cirrhosis are 
discussed, emphasizing personalized approaches over protocol-driven care. Fluid 
and vasopressor management, antibiotic timing and selection, the role of 
adjunctive therapies, the importance of lactate clearance, gut failure, and the 
need for further research in this population are highlighted.

DOI: 10.1080/17474124.2024.2443813
PMID: 39744868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Am J Emerg Med. 2025 Apr;90:169-178. doi: 10.1016/j.ajem.2025.01.055. Epub
2025  Jan 22.

Emergency medicine updates: Evaluation and diagnosis of sepsis and septic shock.

Long B(1), Gottlieb M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Brooke Army Medical Center, Fort Sam 
Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: Brit.long@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
IL, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Sepsis and septic shock are common conditions evaluated and 
managed in the emergency department (ED), and these conditions are associated 
with significant morbidity and mortality. There have been several recent updates 
in the literature, including guidelines, on the evaluation and diagnosis of 
sepsis and septic shock.
OBJECTIVE: This is the first paper in a two-part series that provides emergency 
clinicians with evidence-based updates concerning sepsis and septic shock. This 
first paper focuses on evaluation and diagnosis of sepsis and septic shock.
DISCUSSION: The evaluation, diagnosis, and management of sepsis have evolved 
since the first definition in 1991. Current guidelines emphasize rapid diagnosis 
to improve patient outcomes. However, scoring systems have conflicting data for 
diagnosis, and sepsis should be considered in any patient with infection and 
abnormal vital signs, evidence of systemic inflammation (e.g., elevated white 
blood cell count or C-reactive protein), or evidence of end-organ dysfunction. 
The clinician should consider septic shock in any patient with infection and 
hypotension despite volume resuscitation or who require vasopressors to maintain 
a mean arterial pressure ≥ 65 mmHg. There are a variety of sources of sepsis but 
the most common include pulmonary, urinary tract, abdomen, and skin/soft tissue. 
Examples of other less common etiologies include the central nervous system 
(e.g., meningitis, encephalitis), spine (e.g., spinal epidural abscess, 
osteomyelitis), cardiac (e.g., endocarditis), and joints (e.g., septic 
arthritis). Evaluation may include biomarkers such as procalcitonin, C-reactive 
protein, and lactate, but these should not be used in isolation to exclude 
sepsis. Imaging is a key component of evaluation and should be based on the 
suspected source.
CONCLUSION: There have been several recent updates in the literature including 
guidelines concerning sepsis and septic shock; an understanding of these updates 
can assist emergency clinicians and improve the care of these patients.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajem.2025.01.055
PMID: 39892181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None. No AI 
program was used in the construction of this manuscript.


7. Intensive Care Med. 2019 Apr;45(4):420-433. doi: 10.1007/s00134-019-05544-x. 
Epub 2019 Feb 11.

Challenges in the management of septic shock: a narrative review.

De Backer D(1), Cecconi M(2), Lipman J(3), Machado F(4), Myatra SN(5), Ostermann 
M(6), Perner A(7), Teboul JL(8), Vincent JL(9), Walley KR(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Intensive Care, CHIREC Hospitals, Université Libre de 
Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium. ddebacke@ulb.ac.be.
(2)Department Anaesthesia and Intensive Care Units, IRCCS Istituto Clinico 
Humanitas, Humanitas University, Milan, Italy.
(3)Intensive Care Services, Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital and The 
University of Queensland Centre for Clinical Research, Brisbane, Australia.
(4)Anesthesiology, Pain and Intensive Care Department, Federal University of Sao 
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Department of Anaesthesiology, Critical Care and Pain, Tata Memorial 
Hospital, Mumbai, India.
(6)Department of Intensive Care, King's College London, Guy's & St Thomas' 
Hospital, London, UK.
(7)Department of Intensive Care, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(8)Medical Intensive Care Unit, Bicetre Hospital, Paris-South University 
Hospitals, Inserm UMR_S999, Paris-South University, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(9)Department of Intensive Care, Erasme University Hospital, Université Libre de 
Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.
(10)Centre for Heart Lung Innovation, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
Canada.

While guidelines provide important information on how to approach a patient in 
septic shock, "many challenges remain" for the management of these patients. In 
this narrative review, the panel discusses the challenges in identifying the 
right hemodynamic target, optimization of fluid therapy, selection of 
vasopressor agents, identification of patients who may benefit from inotropic 
agents or on the contrary beta-blockade, and use of steroids. The place for 
microcirculation-targeted therapy is debated as well as the use of alternative 
techniques (blood purification) and therapies (vitamin C). The implications of 
hemodynamic alterations on antibiotic doses is discussed. Finally, the specific 
challenges in low- and middle-income countries are addressed. Ongoing trials 
address some of these challenges, but many uncertainties will remain, and 
individualized therapies based on careful clinical assessment will continue to 
be essential to optimizing the care of patients with septic shock.

DOI: 10.1007/s00134-019-05544-x
PMID: 30741328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Anesthesiol Clin. 2020 Mar;38(1):123-134. doi: 10.1016/j.anclin.2019.11.001.

Perioperative Management of Patients with Sepsis and Septic Shock, Part II: 
Ultrasound Support for Resuscitation.

Bughrara N(1), Diaz-Gomez JL(2), Pustavoitau A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Albany Medical College, 47 New Scotland Avenue, 
MC 131, Albany, NY 12208, USA; Department of Surgery, Albany Medical College, 47 
New Scotland Avenue, MC 131, Albany, NY 12208, USA. Electronic address: 
bughran@amc.edu.
(2)Cardiovascular Critical Care, Professional Development, Education, and 
Clinical Research, Critical Care Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular 
Anesthesia, Texas Heart Institute - Baylor St. Luke's Medical Center, 6720 
Bertner Avenue, Suite 0-520, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Critical Care 
Echocardiography and Point of Care Ultrasound, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Division of Adult Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, 600 North Wolfe Street, Meyer 297, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

Point-of-care ultrasound is capable of identifying the precise causes of 
hemodynamic failure in patients with septic shock. Patients in shock demonstrate 
complex alterations in their circulation, including changes in loading 
conditions (preload and afterload), right and left ventricular function, and 
development of obstructive physiology, and some of them have a burden of 
underlying cardiac disease. Knowledge of underlying hemodynamic derangements in 
such situations allows targeted interventions, that is, fluids, vasoactive, and 
inotropic medications, to optimize patient's perfusion. One example of competing 
goals involves a patient with hypertrophic "thick" left ventricle (LV), which is 
easily identified using point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS). Such patients usually 
have diastolic dysfunction and commonly require higher filling pressures (mainly 
grade II and III diastolic dysfunction) to maintain adequate cardiac output. 
They are vulnerable to the effects of hypovolemia with the potential for dynamic 
LV outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction. The use of inotrope is harmful under these 
circumstances and could lead to worsening of the obstructive physiology because 
of systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve leaflet and mitral regurgitation 
with rapid progression toward a cardiac arrest. Recognizing the increasingly 
important role of POCUS in the perioperative arena, in this review, we highlight 
how POCUS allows anesthesiologists to recognize and manage hemodynamic 
derangements in patients with sepsis and septic shock. We provide a systematic 
approach to the evaluation of this patient population using qualitative 
assessment of myocardial performance, fluid responsiveness, and fluid tolerance. 
Our approach is based on a limited number of ultrasound views: subcostal, 
inferior vena cava (IVC), and lung views are obtained in rapid succession. A 
combination of findings in these views is grouped into distinct hemodynamic 
phenotypes, each of them requiring their own approach to management.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anclin.2019.11.001
PMID: 32008647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure N. Bughrara has nothing to disclose. 
J.L. Diaz-Gomez is a consultant for Philips Healthcare. A. Pustavoitau is an 
advisor and part-owner of Coaptech, LLC.


9. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 2016 Dec;43(4):659-678. doi: 
10.1016/j.ogc.2016.07.010.

Management of Sepsis and Septic Shock for the Obstetrician-Gynecologist.

Plante LA(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, 
Drexel University College of Medicine, 245 North 15th Street, MS 495, 
Philadelphia, PA 19102, USA. Electronic address: Lauren.Plante@drexelmed.edu.

The incidence of sepsis is increasing in the United States, both in the general 
adult population and among pregnant and postpartum women. Neither infection nor 
bacteremia are synonymous with sepsis: it is a dysregulated host response to a 
pathogen in which organ dysfunction is key. New clinical criteria have been 
released. Cornerstones of management are early suspicion and recognition, 
effective fluid resuscitation, and appropriate antimicrobial therapy.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ogc.2016.07.010
PMID: 27816153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Emerg Med Pract. 2025 Aug 1;27(8):1-28. Print 2025 Aug.

Updates and controversies in the early management of sepsis and septic shock.

Hwang EHW(1), Hwang CW(2), Augustin B(3), Guirgis FW(4), Black LP(5).

Author information:
(1)Assistant Professor of Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services 
University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD.
(2)Associate Professor of Emergency Medicine and EMS, Department of Emergency 
Medicine, University of Florida Gainesville, Gainesville, FL.
(3)Assistant Clinical Professor, Department of Emergency Medicine, University of 
Florida Gainesville, Gainesville, FL.
(4)Professor and Vice Chair of Research, Department of Emergency Medicine, 
University of Florida Gainesville, Gainesville, FL.
(5)Assistant Professor, Department of Emergency Medicine, Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL.

Sepsis is a common life-threatening condition that requires early recognition 
and prompt management. Diagnosis and treatment of sepsis and septic shock are 
fundamental for emergency clinicians. Optimal sepsis management includes prompt 
identification of early signs of sepsis and septic shock, hemodynamic 
optimization, knowledge of clinical and laboratory indicators of subtle and 
overt organ dysfunction, and prompt infection source identification and control. 
This structured review summarizes and evaluates the most recent literature on 
the management of sepsis, focusing on the current evidence, guidelines, and 
protocols.

PMID: 40679861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

============================================================
TOPIC: DIABETES MELLITUS TYPE 2
============================================================
1. Acta Med Indones. 2021 Apr;53(2):213-220.

Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and Cognitive Impairment.

Damanik J(1), Yunir E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine Universitas Indonesia - 
Cipto Mangunkusumo Hospital, Jakarta, Indonesia. johanda.damanik@gmail.com.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is strongly associated with lower performance on 
multiple domains of cognitive function and with structural abnormalities of the 
brain. With the growing epidemic of diabetes and aging population, neural 
complications of diabetes are expected to rise and becoming a challenge for 
future health implications. Understanding pathophysiology, factors associated 
with this complication, manifestation of cognitive impairment and various 
metabolic and neuroradiologic markers suggestive of this pathologic condition is 
crucial for proper management of this potentially debilitating complication of 
T2DM. This review will discuss briefly important aspects of cognitive impairment 
in T2DM.

PMID: 34251351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Physiology (Bethesda). 2018 Mar 1;33(2):138-150. doi: 
10.1152/physiol.00003.2018.

Circadian Etiology of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus.

Javeed N(1), Matveyenko AV(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biomedical Engineering, Mayo Clinic , Rochester, 
Minnesota.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, Diabetes, and 
Nutrition, Mayo Clinic School of Medicine, Mayo Clinic , Rochester, Minnesota.

The epidemic of Type 2 diabetes mellitus necessitates development of novel 
therapeutic and preventative strategies to attenuate expansion of this 
debilitating disease. Evidence links the circadian system to various aspects of 
diabetes pathophysiology and treatment. The aim of this review will be to 
outline the rationale for therapeutic targeting of the circadian system in the 
treatment and prevention of Type 2 diabetes mellitus and consequent metabolic 
comorbidities.

DOI: 10.1152/physiol.00003.2018
PMCID: PMC5899235
PMID: 29412061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2023 Mar 9;14:1118848. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2023.1118848. eCollection 2023.

Pharmacological approaches to the prevention of type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Majety P(1), Lozada Orquera FA(1), Edem D(2), Hamdy O(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Virginia Commonwealth 
University Health System, Richmond, VA, United States.
(2)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, University of Arkansas 
Medical Center, Little Rock, AR, United States.
(3)Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.

About 1 in 10 adults worldwide are estimated to have diabetes mellitus. They are 
at risk of developing life-threatening complications resulting in reduced 
quality of life, increased mortality and higher healthcare costs. The ability to 
prevent or delay type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) by modifying some of its risk 
factors has been hypothesized for decades. The long and often gradual 
time-course of increasing dysglycemia prior to diabetes diagnosis suggests that 
interventions during that period could be effective in preventing T2DM. In 
addition to lifestyle modifications, certain drugs prevent or slow development 
of hyperglycemia. Recently, drugs used for obesity management were shown to 
prevent T2DM. In this review, we discuss various pharmacotherapeutic options for 
preventing T2DM.

Copyright © 2023 Majety, Lozada Orquera, Edem and Hamdy.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1118848
PMCID: PMC10033948
PMID: 36967777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The reviewer GW declared a 
past collaboration with the author PM to the handling editor.


4. Curr Vasc Pharmacol. 2020;18(2):110-116. doi:
10.2174/1570161117666190405165151.

Macrovascular Complications of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus.

Viigimaa M(1), Sachinidis A(2), Toumpourleka M(2), Koutsampasopoulos K(2), 
Alliksoo S(1), Titma T(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Cardiology, North Estonia Medical Centre, Tallinn, Estonia; 
Institute of Health Technologies, Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn, 
Estonia.
(2)2nd Propedeutic Department of Internal Medicine, Aristotle University, 
Thessaloniki, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) has emerged as a pandemic. It has 
different complications, both microvascular and macrovascular.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this review is to summarize the different types of 
macrovascular complications associated with T2DM.
METHODS: A comprehensive review of the literature was performed to identify 
clinical studies, which determine the macrovascular complications associated 
with T2DM.
RESULTS: Macrovascular complications of T2DM include coronary heart disease, 
cardiomyopathy, arrhythmias and sudden death, cerebrovascular disease and 
peripheral artery disease. Cardiovascular disease is the primary cause of death 
in diabetic patients. Many clinical studies have shown a connection between T2DM 
and vascular disease, but almost always other risk factors are present in 
diabetic patients, such as hypertension, obesity and dyslipidaemia.
CONCLUSION: T2DM causes a variety of macrovascular complications through 
different pathogenetic pathways that include hyperglycaemia and insulin 
resistance. The association between T2DM and cardiovascular disease is clear, 
but we need more clinical studies in order to identify the pure effect of T2DM.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1570161117666190405165151
PMID: 30961498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Molecules. 2020 Apr 23;25(8):1987. doi: 10.3390/molecules25081987.

Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: A Review of Multi-Target Drugs.

Artasensi A(1), Pedretti A(1), Vistoli G(1), Fumagalli L(1).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Farmaceutiche, University Degli Studi di Milano, 
20133 Milano, Italy.

Diabetes Mellitus (DM) is a multi-factorial chronic health condition that 
affects a large part of population and according to the World Health 
Organization (WHO) the number of adults living with diabetes is expected to 
increase. Since type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is suffered by the majority of 
diabetic patients (around 90-95%) and often the mono-target therapy fails in 
managing blood glucose levels and the other comorbidities, this review focuses 
on the potential drugs acting on multi-targets involved in the treatment of this 
type of diabetes. In particular, the review considers the main systems directly 
involved in T2DM or involved in diabetes comorbidities. Agonists acting on 
incretin, glucagon systems, as well as on peroxisome proliferation activated 
receptors are considered. Inhibitors which target either aldose reductase and 
tyrosine phosphatase 1B or sodium glucose transporters 1 and 2 are taken into 
account. Moreover, with a view at the multi-target approaches for T2DM some 
phytocomplexes are also discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules25081987
PMCID: PMC7221535
PMID: 32340373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


6. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2022 Jul 16;19(14):8677. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph19148677.

Management of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus in Elderly Patients with Frailty and/or 
Sarcopenia.

Sanz-Cánovas J(1)(2), López-Sampalo A(1)(2), Cobos-Palacios L(1)(2), Ricci 
M(1)(2), Hernández-Negrín H(1)(2), Mancebo-Sevilla JJ(1)(2), Álvarez-Recio 
E(1)(2), López-Carmona MD(1)(2), Pérez-Belmonte LM(1)(2), Gómez-Huelgas 
R(1)(2)(3), Bernal-López MR(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Medicina Interna, Hospital Regional 
Universitario de Málaga, Universidad de Málaga (UMA), 29010 Málaga, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Málaga (IBIMA-Plataforma Bionand), 
29590 Málaga, Spain.
(3)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y 
Nutrición (CIBERobn), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

The life expectancy of the population is increasing worldwide due to 
improvements in the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of diseases. This 
favors a higher prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in the elderly. 
Sarcopenia and frailty are also frequently present in aging. These three 
entities share common mechanisms such as insulin resistance, chronic 
inflammation, and mitochondrial dysfunction. The coexistence of these situations 
worsens the prognosis of elderly patients. In this paper, we review the main 
measures for the prevention and management of sarcopenia and/or frailty in 
elderly patients with T2DM.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph19148677
PMCID: PMC9318510
PMID: 35886528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


7. Medicina (B Aires). 2018;78(2):127-130.

[Association between central diabetes insipidus and type 2 diabetes mellitus].

[Article in Spanish]

Palumbo C(1), Nicolaci N(2), La Manna AA(3), Branek N(4), Pissano MN(5).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Nefrología, Clínica Ciudad de la Vida, Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
E-mail: clapalumbo@intramed.net.
(2)Servicio de Neurología, Clínica Ciudad de la Vida, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Servicio de Terapia Intermedia, Clínica Ciudad de la Vida, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(4)Servicio de Laboratorio, Clínica Ciudad de la Vida, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(5)Servicio de Nefrología, Clínica Ciudad de la Vida, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Central diabetes insipidus is a rare disease of the hypothalamus and 
neurohypophysis. It is very unusually found in the adult with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus. It is manifested by a polydipsic polyuric syndrome, which must be 
distinguished from the poorly controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus. Given the 
similarity of both entities and the unusual nature of their coexistence, their 
suspicion is difficult. The case of a 72-year-old male with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus with poor insulin control (fasting hyperglycemia greater than 180 
mg/dl) who had a long-standing polyuric syndrome is here presented. 
Hypernatremia and plasma osmolality elevated together with a low urinary 
osmolality led to the suspicion of diabetes insipidus, which was subsequently 
confirmed by the dehydration test and the administration of desmopressin sc. 
With 61% increase in the calculated urinary osmolarity one hour post 
desmopressin s.c., diabetes insipidus of central type was diagnosed. Nuclear 
Magnetic Resonance showed a bright spot with normal neurohypophysis, 
contributing to the diagnosis of the idiopathic form.

PMID: 29659364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Biomed Pharmacother. 2019 Sep;117:109138. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2019.109138. 
Epub 2019 Jun 24.

Research progress in the relationship between type 2 diabetes mellitus and 
intestinal flora.

Ma Q(1), Li Y(1), Li P(1), Wang M(1), Wang J(1), Tang Z(1), Wang T(2), Luo L(1), 
Wang C(3), Wang T(4), Zhao B(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Chinese Materia Medica, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, 
No.11 North 3rd Ring East Road, Chao-Yang District, Beijing, 100029, China.
(2)National Center for Safety Evaluation of Drugs, National Institutes for Food 
and Drug Control, No.8 Hong-Da Middle Road, Da-Xing District, Beijing, 100176, 
China.
(3)Beijing Research Institute of Chinese Medicine, Beijing University of Chinese 
Medicine, No. 11 North 3rd Ring East Road, Chao-Yang District, Beijing, 100029, 
China.
(4)Beijing Research Institute of Chinese Medicine, Beijing University of Chinese 
Medicine, No. 11 North 3rd Ring East Road, Chao-Yang District, Beijing, 100029, 
China. Electronic address: wangting1973@sina.com.
(5)Beijing Research Institute of Chinese Medicine, Beijing University of Chinese 
Medicine, No. 11 North 3rd Ring East Road, Chao-Yang District, Beijing, 100029, 
China. Electronic address: zhaobs1973@163.com.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a common clinical chronic disease, while its 
pathogenesis is still inconclusive. Intestinal flora, the largest 
micro-ecological system in the human body, is involved in, meanwhile has a major 
impact on the body's material and energy metabolism. Recent studies have shown 
that in addition to obesity, genetics, and islet dysfunction, the disturbance of 
intestinal flora may partly give rise to diabetes. In this paper, we summarized 
the current research on the correlation between T2DM and intestinal flora, and 
concluded the pathological mechanisms of intestinal flora involved in T2DM. 
Moreover, the ideas and methods of prevention and treatment of T2DM based on 
intestinal flora were proposed, providing theoretical basis and literature 
reference for the treatment of T2DM and its complications based on the 
regulation of intestinal flora.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2019.109138
PMID: 31247468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Med Life. 2016 Jul-Sep;9(3):235-239.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus in children and adolescents: a relatively new clinical 
problem within pediatric practice.

Temneanu OR(1), Trandafir LM(1), Purcarea MR(2).

Author information:
(1)Mother and Child Department, "Grigore T. Popa" University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, "Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
Bucharest, Romania.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus is a complex, chronic metabolic disease, presents a 
heterogeneous etiology, with risk factors at the social level and behavioral, 
environmental, and genetic susceptibility. It is associated with serious 
complications, but the early diagnosis and initiation of therapy may prevent or 
delay the onset of long-term complications. In children and adolescents, it was 
observed in particular increasing the prevalence of T2DM along with obesity, 
which is associated with insulin resistance. Patient and family education for a 
young person with T2DM is very important and will focus on behavioral changes 
(diet and activity).

PMCID: PMC5154306
PMID: 27974926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2025 Feb 25;16:1501305. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2025.1501305. eCollection 2025.

Clinical metabolomics in type 2 diabetes mellitus: from pathogenesis to 
biomarkers.

Liu C(#)(1), Chen H(#)(1)(2), Ma Y(1), Zhang L(3), Chen L(1)(2), Huang J(4), 
Zhao Z(1), Jiang H(1), Kong J(5).

Author information:
(1)Luoyang Key Laboratory of Clinical Multiomics and Translational Medicine, 
Henan Key Laboratory of Rare Diseases, Endocrinology and Metabolism Center, The 
First Affiliated Hospital, and College of Clinical Medicine of Henan University 
of Science and Technology, Luoyang, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of 
Clinical Medicine of Henan University of Science and Technology, Luoyang, China.
(3)Department of Integrative Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, and 
College of Clinical Medicine of Henan University of Science and Technology, 
Luoyang, China.
(4)Department of Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, and 
College of Clinical Medicine of Henan University of Science and Technology, 
Luoyang, China.
(5)Institute of Drug Metabolism and Pharmaceutical Analysis, College of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(#)Contributed equally

As a multidimensional metabolic disorder, the disability and death rate of type 
2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) has increased over time. T2DM covers a wide range of 
pathological manifestations ranging from hyperglycemia to multi-organ failure, 
and it has the potential to evolve into acute complications, including ketosis 
and chronic complications such as peripheral neuropathy, retinopathy, and 
nephropathy. T2DM mainly occurs in microvascular and large vessels and thus it 
is restricted for the clinician to diagnose and prescribe. However, the 
pathological mechanism and clinical diagnosis are inadequate. High-throughput 
metabolomics, characterized by non-invasive diagnostic techniques to identify 
potential biomarkers and distinct stages of T2DM, has been increasingly 
recognized as a vigorous tool with latent capacity for clinical translation. The 
pathological stratification of T2DM can significantly reduce disability and 
mortality rates. By tracing the metabolome and associated pathways from impaired 
fasting blood glucose or impaired glucose tolerance to severe organ failure, the 
chief contributions of large, independent population-based cohorts are 
summarized herein. These results facilitate understanding the pathophysiology 
and mechanism and supports research in accurate diagnosis, risk prediction, 
curative effect, distinct stages, and prognosis judgment of T2DM.

Copyright © 2025 Liu, Chen, Ma, Zhang, Chen, Huang, Zhao, Jiang and Kong.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2025.1501305
PMCID: PMC11893406
PMID: 40070584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

============================================================
TOPIC: HYPERTENSION MANAGEMENT
============================================================
1. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2018 Jul;33(4):388-393. doi: 10.1097/HCO.0000000000000532.

The role of diet for prevention and management of hypertension.

Ozemek C(1), Laddu DR(1), Arena R(1), Lavie CJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Therapy and the Integrative Physiology Laboratory, 
College of Applied Health Sciences, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, 
Illinois.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, John Ochsner Heart and Vascular 
Institute, Ochsner Clinical School-University of Queensland School of Medicine, 
New Orleans, Los Angeles, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Regular consumption of a diet high in sodium, energy dense 
foods, fat content, refined carbohydrates, added sugar and low in fruits and 
vegetables contributes to an increased risk of developing hypertension (HTN) and 
cardiovascular disease. This review aims to provide a synopsis of evidence-based 
dietary approaches that have been effective in lowering blood pressure (BP) in 
pre-HTN and individuals with HTN.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent dietary recommendations have emphasized overall dietary 
patterns and its relation between food and BP. The Dietary Approaches to Stop 
Hypertension (DASH) diet and modifications to the DASH diet, coupled with 
reductions in sodium intake, show dose-dependent decreases in BP. Implementation 
of digital lifestyle interventions based on the DASH diet have been effective 
and show potential for clinical application.
SUMMARY: Adopting a diet rich in plant-based foods, whole grains, low-fat dairy 
products, and sodium intake within normal limits can be effective in the 
prevention and management of HTN. These diets have been found to be more 
effective in older adults and hypertensive persons, particularly in studies that 
provided meals or frequent dietary counseling.

DOI: 10.1097/HCO.0000000000000532
PMID: 29771736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Diabetes Metab Syndr. 2024 Apr;18(4):103008. doi: 10.1016/j.dsx.2024.103008. 
Epub 2024 Apr 16.

Current status of hypertension care and management in the Philippines.

Dela Rosa JGL(1), Catral CDM(1), Reyes NA(1), Opiso DMS(1), Ong EP(1), Ornos 
EDB(2), Santos JR(2), Quebral EPB(2), Callanta MLJ(3), Oliva RV(4), Tantengco 
OAG(5).

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, University of the Philippines, Ermita, Manila, 
Philippines.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, College of Public Health, University of 
the Philippines, Ermita, Manila, Philippines.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, 
University of the Philippines, Ermita, Manila, Philippines.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Medicine, University of 
the Philippines, Ermita, Manila, Philippines; Department of Medicine, University 
of the Philippines - Philippine General Hospital, Taft Avenue, Manila, 
Philippines.
(5)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, University of the Philippines, 
Ermita, Manila, Philippines; Department of Biology, College of Science, De La 
Salle University, Manila, Philippines. Electronic address: 
ogtantengco@up.edu.ph.

AIMS: In this paper, we discuss the existing data on the burden of hypertension 
in the Philippines and present the status of management, prevention, and control 
of hypertension in the country.
METHODS: A literature review was conducted to synthesize the status of 
hypertension care in the Philippines.
RESULTS: Hypertension continues to contribute to the country's leading causes of 
death. Similar to the global trend, almost half of hypertensive Filipinos are 
still not aware of their condition, and only 27 % have it under control. The 
prevalence of hypertension has steadily increased from 22 % in 1993 to 25.15 % 
in 2013. The 2020 Philippine Society for Hypertension clinical practice 
guideline defines hypertension as an office BP of 140/90 mm Hg or above 
following the proper standard BP measurement. During the past decade, 
monotherapy has been the mode of treatment in more than 80 % of Filipino 
patients. This could also explain why the BP control rates have been low. The 
most prevalent complications of hypertension in the Philippines were stroke 
(11.6 %), ischemic heart disease (7.7 %), chronic kidney disease (6.30 %), and 
hypertensive retinopathy (2.30 %). Hypertension causes economic tolls on 
patients, from the cost of drugs to hospitalization and complications. 
Hospitalization from hypertensive complications can easily wipe out the savings 
of middle-class families and is catastrophic for lower-income Filipinos.
CONCLUSION: In this review, we summarize the existing data on the burden of 
hypertension among Filipinos and the risk factors associated with the disease. 
We present the current screening tools, diagnostics, treatment, and prevention 
strategies for hypertension in the Philippines. Lastly, we propose solutions to 
meet the global targets of hypertension management and help relieve the growing 
burden of this disease.

Copyright © 2024 Research Trust of DiabetesIndia (DiabetesIndia) and National 
Diabetes Obesity and Cholesterol Foundation (N-DOC). Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dsx.2024.103008
PMID: 38640838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


3. JACC Heart Fail. 2024 Aug;12(8):1328-1342. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2024.04.031.
Epub  2024 Jul 3.

Considerations in the Diagnosis and Management of Pulmonary Hypertension 
Associated With Left Heart Disease.

Ilonze OJ(1), Ebong IA(2), Guglin M(3), Nair A(4), Rich J(5), McLaughlin V(6), 
Tedford RJ(7), Mazimba S(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Krannert Cardiovascular Research Center, 
Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA. Electronic address: 
oilonze@iu.edu.
(2)Division of Cardiology, University of California Davis, Sacramento, 
California, USA.
(3)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Krannert Cardiovascular Research Center, 
Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(4)Winters Center for Heart Failure Research, Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical 
Center, Texas Heart Institute, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(5)Division of Cardiology, Bluhm Cardiovascular Institute Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(6)University of Michigan Hospital and Health Systems, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(7)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, USA.
(8)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Virginia Health System, 
Charlottesville, Virginia, USA; AdventHealth, Orlando, Florida, USA.

Erratum in
    JACC Heart Fail. 2024 Nov;12(11):1954-1955. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2024.09.001.

Pulmonary hypertension associated with left heart disease (PH-LHD) remains the 
most common cause of pulmonary hypertension globally. Etiologies include heart 
failure with reduced and preserved ejection fraction and left-sided valvular 
heart diseases. Despite the increasing prevalence of PH-LHD, there remains a 
paucity of knowledge about the hemodynamic definition, diagnosis, treatment 
modalities, and prognosis among clinicians. Moreover, clinical trials have 
produced mixed results on the usefulness of pulmonary vasodilator therapies for 
PH-LHD. In this expert review, we have outlined the critical role of meticulous 
hemodynamic evaluation and provocative testing for cases of diagnostic 
uncertainty. Therapeutic strategies-pharmacologic, device-based, and surgical 
therapies used for managing PH-LHD-are also outlined. PH-LHD in advanced heart 
failure, and the role of mechanical circulatory support in PH-LHD is briefly 
explored. An in-depth understanding of PH-LHD by all clinicians is needed for 
improved recognition and outcomes among patients with PH-LHD.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jchf.2024.04.031
PMID: 38970588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Funding Support and Author Disclosures The 
authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to the contents 
of this paper to disclose.


4. Arch Dis Child. 2017 Dec;102(12):1176-1179. doi: 
10.1136/archdischild-2015-309740. Epub 2017 Jul 24.

Management of severe hypertension in the newborn.

Dionne JM(1), Flynn JT(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Nephrology, University of British 
Columbia, BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver, Canada.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Nephrology, University of Washington, 
Seattle Children's Hospital, Washington, USA.

Blood pressure is considered a vital sign, as values too low or too high can be 
related with serious morbidity and mortality. In neonates, normal blood pressure 
values undergo rapid changes, especially in premature infants, making the 
recognition of abnormal blood pressures more challenging. Severe hypertension 
can occur in neonates and infants and is a medical emergency, often manifesting 
with congestive heart failure or other life-threatening complications. The cause 
or risk factors for the hypertension can usually be identified and may guide 
management. Most classes of antihypertensive medications have been used in the 
neonatal population. For severe hypertension, intravenous short-acting 
medications are preferred for a controlled reduction of blood pressure. In this 
article, we focus on identification, aetiology and management of severe 
hypertension in the newborn.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of 
the article) 2017. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless 
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/archdischild-2015-309740
PMID: 28739634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


5. Hypertension. 2018 Jul;72(1):24-43. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.117.10803.

Hypertensive Disorders of Pregnancy: ISSHP Classification, Diagnosis, and 
Management Recommendations for International Practice.

Brown MA(1), Magee LA(2), Kenny LC(3)(4), Karumanchi SA(5), McCarthy FP(4), 
Saito S(6), Hall DR(7), Warren CE(8), Adoyi G(9), Ishaku S(9); International 
Society for the Study of Hypertension in Pregnancy (ISSHP).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Renal Medicine and Medicine, St. George Hospital and 
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia (M.A.B.) mbrown@unsw.edu.au.
(2)Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine, King's College London, United Kingdom 
(L.A.M.).
(3)Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, University of Liverpool, United Kingdom 
(L.C.K.).
(4)INFANT Centre, Cork University Maternity Hospital, Ireland (L.C.K., F.P.M.).
(5)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA (S.A.K.).
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Graduate School of Medicine and 
Pharmaceutical Science for Research, University of Toyama, Japan (S.S.).
(7)Department Obstetrics and Gynecology, Stellenbosch University and Tygerberg 
Hospital, South Africa (D.R.H.).
(8)Reproductive Health Program, Population Council, Washington, DC (C.E.W.).
(9)Reproductive Health Program, Population Council-Nigeria, West Africa (G.A., 
S.I.).

DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.117.10803
PMID: 29899139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Hum Hypertens. 2017 Dec;31(12):763-767. doi: 10.1038/jhh.2017.57. Epub 2017 
Jul 27.

Changing concepts in hypertension management.

Gudsoorkar PS(1)(2), Tobe SW(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Clinical Fellow Adult Renal Transplant, Multi Organ 
Transplant Program, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Medicine, Fellow Adult Renal Transplant Program, Multi-Organ 
Transplant Program, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre-Division of Nephrology, Department of 
Medicine, University of Toronto and Northern Ontario School of Medicine and 
HSF/NOSM Chair of Aboriginal and Rural Health Research, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Hypertension is the most common modifiable risk factor for cardiovascular 
disease and death, and lowering blood pressure with anti-hypertensive drugs 
reduces target organ damage and prevents cardiovascular disease outcomes. The 
recent trials SPRINT and HOPE-3 will lead to changes in the way we manage 
hypertension and impact on clinical practice guidelines. These studies also 
demonstrate the shift toward automated blood pressure measurements. We have 
reviewed these studies and others to put them in context with the guidelines 
that have come before and to describe how they will impact on hypertension 
treatment thresholds and targets, the treatment of hypertension in the elderly, 
and changing approaches to the management of hypertension including resistant 
hypertension.

DOI: 10.1038/jhh.2017.57
PMID: 28748919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Acta Med Indones. 2015 Jan;47(1):78-86.

Management of hypertension in pregnancy.

Mudjari NS(1), Samsu N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Brawijaya 
- Saiful Anwar Hospital, Malang, Indonesia.

Hypertension-related maternal mortality reaches 16% when it is compared to other 
causes of maternal mortality such as sepsis, bleeding or abortus. Pregnant women 
with hypertension disorder are at increased risk for experiencing numerous 
complications including disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), cerebral 
hemorrhage, liver dysfunction and acute renal failure; while to the fetus, it 
may cause intrauterine growth retardation, prematurity and perinatal mortality. 
Hypertension in pregnancy should be managed appropriately to reduce maternal and 
fetal morbidity and mortality rate, i.e. by preventing women from getting the 
risks of increased blood pressure, preventing disease progression and preventing 
the development of seizure and considering termination of pregnancy in 
life-threatening situation for maternal and fetal health.

PMID: 25948773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2018 Jul;33(4):382-387. doi: 10.1097/HCO.0000000000000527.

The role of the pharmacist in hypertension management.

Di Palo KE(1), Kish T(2).

Author information:
(1)Montefiore Medical Center, Department of Cardiology, Bronx.
(2)Arnold and Marie Schwartz College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Long 
Island University, Brooklyn, New York, New York, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Hypertension remains a vital, modifiable risk factor in the 
prevention of cardiovascular disease. However, many patients do not achieve 
their therapeutic goals for numerous reasons which can include poor disease 
insight and nonadherence. Pharmacists can be key players in controlling 
hypertension, given their medication knowledge and patient counseling skills, 
yet they remain an underutilized resource in the management of chronic disease 
states. Various models exist that allow pharmacists to provide direct 
patient-centered care but practices differ from state to state since pharmacists 
are not recognized nationally as healthcare providers. This article aims to 
provide an update on the proven methods in which pharmacists contribute to the 
management of hypertensive patients.
RECENT FINDINGS: Several recently published studies demonstrate the positive 
impact of pharmacist intervention and care on patient outcomes in ambulatory and 
community settings. These practice models include medication therapy management, 
collaborative drug therapy management, telehealth and team-based care.
SUMMARY: The role of the pharmacist in hypertension encompasses medication 
management, disease state education and patient counseling and is most 
successful when integrated into the patient's care team. Further validation 
through larger, prospective trials and evaluation of long-term outcomes, such as 
mortality, remain viable research opportunities.

DOI: 10.1097/HCO.0000000000000527
PMID: 29697544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 2003 May-Jun;5(3 Suppl 2):33-40. doi: 
10.1111/j.1524-6175.2003.02466.x.

The hypertension management program: identifying opportunities for improvement.

Maue SK(1), Jackson JH 4th, Weiss BA, Rivo ML, Jhaveri V, Lennert B.

Author information:
(1)Applied Health Outcomes, Tampa, FL 33609, USA. smaue@applied-outcomes.com

To date, relatively few programs have been evaluated that were designed to 
affect the clinical practice patterns of primary care physicians who treat 
patients with hypertension. In particular, studies that have evaluated blood 
pressure control as a clinical outcome before and after an intervention are 
lacking. The Hypertension Management Program, developed by Applied Health 
Outcomes, is a quality improvement program designed to improve the medical 
management of hypertension in population-based health care settings. This 
program is in the process of continuing to collect baseline data from health 
maintenance organizations, conducting physician-focused interventions designed 
for improving clinical care, and collecting postintervention data between 6 and 
12 months after the intervention is completed to determine its effect. The 
authors present the rationale for conducting large-scale hypertension management 
programs that measure outcomes, as well as preliminary baseline and 
postintervention data from the Hypertension Management Program, based on a 
current database of more than 1.9 million individuals enrolled in eight health 
care plans.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1524-6175.2003.02466.x
PMCID: PMC8099245
PMID: 12826768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Int J Public Health. 2022 Jun 2;67:1604452. doi: 10.3389/ijph.2022.1604452. 
eCollection 2022.

Chronic Disease Management for People With Hypertension.

Lee WR(1), Yoo KB(1), Jeong J(2), Koo JH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Administration, Yonsei University, Wonju, South Korea.
(2)Institute of Health and Welfare, Yonsei University, Wonju, South Korea.
(3)Yonsei University Wonju Industry-Academic Cooperation Foundation, Wonju, 
South Korea.

Objectives: To assess the effectiveness of continuity of care policies by 
identifying the impact of a chronic disease management program on the continuity 
of care in patients with hypertension in South Korea. Methods: The propensity 
score matching method was used to control selection bias, and the 
difference-in-differences method was used to compare the impact on the treatment 
and control groups according to the policy intervention. Results: The continuity 
of care index of hypertensive patients using the difference-in-differences 
analysis outcome of the chronic disease management program was higher than that 
of the non-participating hypertensive patients. Conclusion: Continuous treatment 
is vital for chronic diseases such as hypertension. However, the proportion of 
those participating in the intervention was low. Encouraging more hypertensive 
patients to participate in policy intervention through continuous research and 
expanding the policy to appropriately reflect the increasing number of chronic 
diseases is necessary.

Copyright © 2022 Lee, Yoo, Jeong and Koo.

DOI: 10.3389/ijph.2022.1604452
PMCID: PMC9200966
PMID: 35719730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

============================================================
TOPIC: ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE
============================================================
1. Curr Pharm Des. 2023;29(5):356-364. doi: 10.2174/1381612829666221219093450.

Antibiotic Resistance and Microbiota Response.

Santacroce L(1), Di Domenico M(2), Montagnani M(3), Jirillo E(1).

Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Department of Medicine, Section of Microbiology and 
Virology, School of Medicine, University of Bari "Aldo Moro", Bari, Italy.
(2)Department of Precision Medicine, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", 
Naples, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human Oncology, Section of 
Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of Bari "Aldo Moro", Bari, Italy.

Use of antibiotics has dramatically eradicated bacterial infections in humans 
and animals. However, antibiotic overdose and abuse are responsible for the 
emergence of so-called multi-drug resistant bacteria. Gut microbiota deserves 
many functions in the host, and among them, integrity of epithelial barrier and 
enhancement of protective immune responses are included. There is evidence that 
antibiotic treatment decreases the diversity of gut microbiota species, also 
provoking metabolic changes, increased susceptibility to colonization and 
decrease of antimicrobial peptide secretion, leading to antibiotic resistance. 
In this review, the major mechanisms involved in antibiotic resistance will be 
illustrated. However, novel findings on the potential use of alternative 
treatments to overcome antibiotic resistance will be elucidated. In this regard, 
special emphasis will be placed on microcins, prebiotics, probiotics and 
postbiotics, as well as phage therapy and fecal microbial transplantation.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1381612829666221219093450
PMID: 36537602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Drug Discov Today Technol. 2014 Mar;11:33-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ddtec.2014.02.001.

General principles of antibiotic resistance in bacteria.

Martinez JL.

Given the impact of antibiotic resistance on human health, its study is of great 
interest from a clinical view- point. In addition, antibiotic resistance is one 
of the few examples of evolution that can be studied in real time. Knowing the 
general principles involved in the acquisition of antibiotic resistance is 
therefore of interest to clinicians, evolutionary biologists and ecologists. The 
origin of antibiotic resistance genes now possessed by human pathogens can be 
traced back to environmental microorganisms. Consequently, a full understanding 
of the evolution of antibiotic resistance requires the study of natural 
environments as well as clinical ecosystems. Updated information on the 
evolutionary mechanisms behind resistance, indicates that ecological 
connectivity, founder effect and fitness costs are important bottle- necks that 
modulate the transfer of resistance from environmental microorganisms to 
pathogens.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ddtec.2014.02.001
PMID: 24847651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Sci Total Environ. 2019 Jun 1;667:64-76. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.02.183.
 Epub 2019 Feb 13.

Antibiotic resistance in urban runoff.

Almakki A(1), Jumas-Bilak E(2), Marchandin H(3), Licznar-Fajardo P(4).

Author information:
(1)HSM, Univ Montpellier, IRD, CNRS, Montpellier, France; Department of Clinical 
Laboratory Science, College of Pharmacy, University of Basrah, Iraq.
(2)HSM, Univ Montpellier, IRD, CNRS, Département d'Hygiène Hospitalière, CHU de 
Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(3)HSM, Univ Montpellier, IRD, CNRS, Montpellier, France, Département de 
Microbiologie, CHU Nîmes, Nîmes, France.
(4)HSM, Univ Montpellier, IRD, CNRS, Département d'Hygiène Hospitalière, CHU de 
Montpellier, Montpellier, France. Electronic address: 
patricia.licznar-fajardo@umontpellier.fr.

Aquatic ecosystems subjected to anthropogenic pressures are places of rapid 
evolution of microbial communities and likely hotspots for selection and 
emergence of antibiotic resistant bacteria. In urban settings, water quality and 
the risk of infection are generally assessed in sewers and in effluents of 
wastewater treatment plants. Physical and chemical parameters as well as the 
presence of antibiotics, antibiotic-resistant bacteria and genes of resistance 
are driven by urban activities, with adverse effects on aquatic ecosystems. In 
this paper we review the environmental pressures exerted on bacterial 
communities in urban runoff waters and discuss the impact of these settings on 
antibiotic resistance. Considering the worrisome epidemiology of infectious 
diseases and estimated mortality due to antimicrobial resistance in the coming 
decades, there is an urgent need to identify all environmental reservoirs of 
resistant bacteria and resistance genes to complete our knowledge of the 
epidemiological cycle and of the dynamics of urban antibiotic resistance.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.02.183
PMID: 30826682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Glob Antimicrob Resist. 2019 Dec;19:313-316. doi:
10.1016/j.jgar.2019.05.024.  Epub 2019 Jun 5.

Global economic impact of antibiotic resistance: A review.

Ahmad M(1), Khan AU(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Microbiology and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Interdisciplinary 
Biotechnology Unit, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh 202002, India.
(2)Medical Microbiology and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Interdisciplinary 
Biotechnology Unit, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh 202002, India. Electronic 
address: asad.k@rediffmail.com.

The pandemic of antibiotic resistance has become a serious threat to the 
therapeutic efficacy of the available antibiotics and their prescribed regimens. 
The problem is multifaceted as it encompasses medical, social, economic and 
anthropogenic spheres. The present review reports the global economic impact of 
antibiotic resistance among humans on the basis of published research as well as 
reports of national and international organisations. The impact is catastrophic 
because it includes patients, healthcare providers, researchers, pharmaceutical 
organisations, healthcare businesses and, moreover, national and international 
policy-makers. We found very serious economic impacts of the existing and 
emerging antibiotic resistance conditions. This study is divided into 
geographical regions to see the total impact. The risk of medical poverty trap 
is more significant in low-resource settings.

Copyright © 2019 International Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. Published 
by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jgar.2019.05.024
PMID: 31176071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Med J Malaysia. 1994 Dec;49(4):315-6.

Antibiotic resistance.

Lim VK.

Comment on
    Med J Malaysia. 1994 Dec;49(4):317-26.

PMID: 7674965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2001 Aug;14(4):433-6. doi: 
10.1097/00001432-200108000-00006.

Antibiotic resistance: closing the loop.

Burke JP.

DOI: 10.1097/00001432-200108000-00006
PMID: 11964861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2020 Nov;85(11):1289-1291. doi:
10.1134/S0006297920110012.

Overcoming Antibiotic Resistance in Microorganisms: Molecular Mechanisms.

Gabibov AG(1)(2), Dontsova OA(1)(2)(3), Egorov AM(4).

Author information:
(1)Shemyakin and Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Russian Academy 
of Sciences, Moscow, 117997, Russia.
(2)Faculty of Chemistry, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, 119991, 
Russia.
(3)Center of Life Sciences, Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, 
Skolkovo, 143028, Russia.
(4)Faculty of Chemistry, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, 119991, 
Russia. alex.m.egorov@gmail.com.

This issue of the Biochemistry (Moscow) journal presents reviews and 
experimental articles on the new strategies for solving the problem of 
antibiotic resistance and on the search for novel antimicrobial preparations 
using the methods of molecular biology, genetics, and nanotechnology. A wide 
variety of scientific approaches and successful (as a rule) research results 
give hope for overcoming microbial antibiotic resistance in the fight against 
infectious diseases.

DOI: 10.1134/S0006297920110012
PMID: 33280573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Crit Care Clin. 1998 Apr;14(2):309-27. doi: 10.1016/s0749-0704(05)70397-3.

Antibiotic resistance. Control strategies.

Cunha BA(1).

Author information:
(1)Infectious Disease Division, Winthrop-University Hospital, Mineola, New York, 
USA.

Antibiotic resistance is a worldwide concern. Over the past several decades, 
antibiotic resistance has increased to many respiratory pathogens as well as 
aerobic gram-negative bacilli. Recently, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus (MRSA) and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE) have become important 
hospital pathogens. Antibiotic resistance is not related to a particular 
antibiotic structure and is not dependent upon mechanism of antibiotic action. 
The volume of use per se does not increase antimicrobial resistance. This 
article discusses control strategies and identifies which antibiotics are 
associated with the emergence of resistant organisms.

DOI: 10.1016/s0749-0704(05)70397-3
PMID: 9561819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Br Dent J. 2017 Nov 10;223(9):692. doi: 10.1038/sj.bdj.2017.958.

Antibiotic resistance.

[No authors listed]

New antibiotics and further education about prescribing are needed.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bdj.2017.958
PMID: 29123317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2023 Jan 5;12:1119244. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2022.1119244. eCollection 2022.

Editorial: Pathogenic Neisseria: Pathogenicity, vaccines, and antibiotic 
resistance.

Arenas J(1).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary, University of 
Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain.

Comment on
    Editorial on the Research Topic Pathogenic Neisseria: Pathogenicity, 
vaccines, and antibiotic resistance.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2022.1119244
PMCID: PMC9850228
PMID: 36683679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

============================================================
TOPIC: ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY
============================================================
1. Lancet. 2012 Aug 25;380(9843):756-66. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(11)61454-2. Epub
 2012 May 21.

Acute kidney injury.

Bellomo R(1), Kellum JA, Ronco C.

Author information:
(1)Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Research Centre, School of Public 
Health and Preventive Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia. 
rinaldo.bellomo@austin.org.au

Comment in
    Lancet. 2012 Dec 1;380(9857):1904; author reply 1905. doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(12)62104-7.
    Lancet. 2012 Dec 1;380(9857):1904; author reply 1905. doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(12)62105-9.

Acute kidney injury (formerly known as acute renal failure) is a syndrome 
characterised by the rapid loss of the kidney's excretory function and is 
typically diagnosed by the accumulation of end products of nitrogen metabolism 
(urea and creatinine) or decreased urine output, or both. It is the clinical 
manifestation of several disorders that affect the kidney acutely. Acute kidney 
injury is common in hospital patients and very common in critically ill 
patients. In these patients, it is most often secondary to extrarenal events. 
How such events cause acute kidney injury is controversial. No specific 
therapies have emerged that can attenuate acute kidney injury or expedite 
recovery; thus, treatment is supportive. New diagnostic techniques (eg, renal 
biomarkers) might help with early diagnosis. Patients are given renal 
replacement therapy if acute kidney injury is severe and biochemical or 
volume-related, or if uraemic-toxaemia-related complications are of concern. If 
patients survive their illness and do not have premorbid chronic kidney disease, 
they typically recover to dialysis independence. However, evidence suggests that 
patients who have had acute kidney injury are at increased risk of subsequent 
chronic kidney disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(11)61454-2
PMID: 22617274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Kidney Int. 2019 Nov;96(5):1083-1099. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2019.05.026. Epub
2019  Jun 7.

Acute kidney injury from sepsis: current concepts, epidemiology, 
pathophysiology, prevention and treatment.

Peerapornratana S(1), Manrique-Caballero CL(2), Gómez H(2), Kellum JA(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Critical Care Nephrology, Department of Critical Care Medicine, 
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA; The 
Clinical Research, Investigation and Systems Modeling of Acute Illness Center, 
Department of Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA; Excellence Center for Critical Care 
Nephrology, Division of Nephrology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn 
University, Bangkok, Thailand; Department of Laboratory Medicine, Chulalongkorn 
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Center for Critical Care Nephrology, Department of Critical Care Medicine, 
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA; The 
Clinical Research, Investigation and Systems Modeling of Acute Illness Center, 
Department of Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Center for Critical Care Nephrology, Department of Critical Care Medicine, 
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA; The 
Clinical Research, Investigation and Systems Modeling of Acute Illness Center, 
Department of Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. Electronic address: kellum@pitt.edu.

Sepsis-associated acute kidney injury (S-AKI) is a frequent complication of the 
critically ill patient and is associated with unacceptable morbidity and 
mortality. Prevention of S-AKI is difficult because by the time patients seek 
medical attention, most have already developed acute kidney injury. Thus, early 
recognition is crucial to provide supportive treatment and limit further 
insults. Current diagnostic criteria for acute kidney injury has limited early 
detection; however, novel biomarkers of kidney stress and damage have been 
recently validated for risk prediction and early diagnosis of acute kidney 
injury in the setting of sepsis. Recent evidence shows that microvascular 
dysfunction, inflammation, and metabolic reprogramming are 3 fundamental 
mechanisms that may play a role in the development of S-AKI. However, more 
mechanistic studies are needed to better understand the convoluted 
pathophysiology of S-AKI and to translate these findings into potential 
treatment strategies and add to the promising pharmacologic approaches being 
developed and tested in clinical trials.

Copyright © 2019 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2019.05.026
PMCID: PMC6920048
PMID: 31443997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURE JAK discloses grant support and 
consulting fees from Astute Medical, Baxter, bioMerieux, BioPorto, and NxStage. 
All the other authors declared no competing interests.


3. Ann Intern Med. 2017 Nov 7;167(9):ITC66-ITC80. doi: 10.7326/AITC201711070.

Acute Kidney Injury.

Levey AS(1), James MT(1).

Author information:
(1)From Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, and the University of 
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta.

Erratum in
    Ann Intern Med. 2018 Jan 2;168(1):84. doi: 10.7326/L17-0682.

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2018 Jun 5;168(11):836-837. doi: 10.7326/L18-0015.
    Ann Intern Med. 2018 Jun 5;168(11):836. doi: 10.7326/L18-0016.
    Ann Intern Med. 2018 Jun 5;168(11):837. doi: 10.7326/L18-0017.

Acute kidney injury is a heterogeneous group of conditions characterized by a 
sudden decrease in glomerular filtration rate, manifested by an increase in 
serum creatinine concentration or oliguria, and classified by stage and cause. 
This type of injury occurs in approximately 20% of hospitalized patients, with 
major complications including volume overload, electrolyte disorders, uremic 
complications, and drug toxicity. Management includes specific treatments 
according to the underlying cause and supportive treatment to prevent and manage 
complications. Kidney replacement therapy is used when complications cannot be 
managed with medical therapy alone. Despite advances in care, the mortality rate 
in patients requiring kidney replacement therapy remains approximately 50%.

DOI: 10.7326/AITC201711070
PMID: 29114754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 2022 May;52(3):659-672. doi: 
10.1016/j.cvsm.2022.01.005. Epub 2022 Apr 1.

Acute Kidney Injury in Dogs and Cats.

Ross L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine, 
Tufts University, 200 Westboro Road, North Grafton, MA 01536, USA. Electronic 
address: linda.ross@tufts.edu.

Acute kidney injury can cause significant morbidity and mortality in dogs and 
cats. Knowledge of the pathophysiology of renal damage can be beneficial to 
prevention and treatment. There are many causes of acute kidney injury, and the 
prognosis for each can vary. Appropriate fluid therapy and monitoring are 
essential for treatment.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cvsm.2022.01.005
PMID: 35379499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The author has no conflicts of 
interest.


5. J Inj Violence Res. 2016 Jan;8(1):58-62. doi: 10.5249/jivr.v8i1.610.

Acute kidney injury: current concepts and new insights.

Koza Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Ataturk University Faculty of Medicine, Erzurum, 
Turkey. E-mail: yavuzerkoza@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Acute kidney injury, which was previously named as acute renal 
failure, is a complex clinical disorder and continues to be associated with poor 
outcomes. It is frequently seen in hospitalized patients, especially in 
critically ill patients. The primary causes of acute kidney injury are divided 
into three categories: prerenal, intrinsic renal and postrenal. The definition 
and staging of acute kidney injury are mainly based on the risk, injury, 
failure, loss, end-stage kidney disease (RIFLE) criteria and the acute kidney 
injury network (AKIN) criteria, which have previously been defined. However the 
clinical utility of these criteria is still uncertain. Several biomarkers such 
as Cystatin C and neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin have been suggested 
for the diagnosis, severity classification and most importantly, the 
modification of outcome in acute kidney injury.
METHODS: Current literature on the definition, biomarkers, management and 
epidemiology of acute kidney injury was reviewed by searching keywords in 
Medline and PubMed databases.
RESULTS: The epidemiology, pathophysiology and diagnosis of acute kidney injury 
were discussed. The clinical implications of novel biomarkers and management of 
acute kidney injury were also discussed.
CONCLUSIONS: The current definitions of acute kidney injury are based on the 
RIFLE, AKIN and KDIGO criteria. Although these criteria have been widely 
validated, some of limitations are still remain. Since acute kidney injury is 
common and harmful, all preventive measures should be taken to avoid its 
occurrence. Currently, there is no a definitive role for novel biomarkers.

© 2016 KUMS, All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.5249/jivr.v8i1.610
PMCID: PMC4729334
PMID: 26804946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Adv Anesth. 2023 Dec;41(1):205-224. doi: 10.1016/j.aan.2023.06.005. Epub 2023 
Jul 19.

Perioperative Acute Kidney Injury: Implications, Approach, Prevention.

Balakrishna A(1), Walco J(1), Billings FT 4th(1), Lopez MG(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Anesthesiology Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(2)Division of Anesthesiology Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA. 
Electronic address: marcos.g.lopez@vumc.org.

Acute kidney injury remains a common and significant contributor to 
perioperative morbidity. Acute kidney injury worsens patient outcomes, and 
anesthesiologists should make significant efforts to prevent, assess, and treat 
perioperative renal injury. The authors discuss the impact of renal injury on 
patient outcomes and putative underlying mechanisms, evidence underlying 
treatments for acute kidney injury, and practices that may prevent the 
development of perioperative renal injury.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aan.2023.06.005
PMCID: PMC11079993
PMID: 38251619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:595947. doi: 10.1155/2015/595947. Epub 2015 Jan 6.

Acute kidney injury.

Lombardi R(1), Burdmann EA(2), Ferreiro A(3), Liaño F(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Servicio Médico Integral, Montevideo, 
Uruguay.
(2)Division of Nephrology, University of Sao Paulo Medical School, Sao Paulo, 
Brazil.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Universidad de la República and Department of 
Nephrology, CASMU, Montevideo, Uruguay.
(4)Department of Nephrology, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, Instituto 
Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria (IRYCIS), RedinRen, CIFRA, 28034 
Madrid, Spain.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/595947
PMCID: PMC4303026
PMID: 25632396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Crit Care Nurs Clin North Am. 2022 Dec;34(4):431-441. doi: 
10.1016/j.cnc.2022.08.004.

Acute Kidney Injury in the Inpatient and Outpatient Setting.

Realista S(1).

Author information:
(1)Real Health America LLC, 3700 34th Street, suite 302H, Orlando, FL 32805, 
USA. Electronic address: srealista@realhealthllc.com.

The incidence and prevalence of inpatient acute kidney injury is continuing to 
increase. Acute kidney injury (AKI) is an all-encompassing topic in renal care 
as well as critical care. The definition and criteria for diagnosis of AKI have 
evolved over time. There are many causes of AKI and identifying the cause is key 
in reversing and controlling the progression of disease. Metabolic acidosis, 
fluid overload, and sepsis require detailed evaluation to best provide the most 
appropriate plan and execution. Critical care nurses are vitally important when 
identifying and managing acute kidney injury. Renal replacement therapy is a 
remarkable tool that requires expertise from the critical nurse. Once it is 
mastered, the most vulnerable patient in the ICU can become the recipient of 
good and positive outcomes.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cnc.2022.08.004
PMID: 36336433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Crit Care Nurs Clin North Am. 2019 Sep;31(3):407-417. doi: 
10.1016/j.cnc.2019.05.008. Epub 2019 Jun 11.

Acute Kidney Injury Following Cardiothoracic Surgery.

Arellano DL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Undergraduate Studies, Cizik School of Nursing, University of 
Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Room # 775, 6901 Bertner Avenue, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Division of Anesthesiology, Critical Care, and Pain 
Medicine, Department of Critical Care, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: Daniel.L.Arellano@uth.tmc.edu.

This article reviews acute kidney injury following cardiothoracic surgery, 
addressing the full spectrum of the perioperative environment including 
preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative factors for acute kidney injury. 
Topics discussed include pathophysiology, risk prediction scoring, diagnosis, 
prevention, treatment, and new directions for research.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cnc.2019.05.008
PMID: 31351558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Crit Care. 2014 May 28;18(3):224. doi: 10.1186/cc13897.

Acute kidney injury due to rhabdomyolysis and renal replacement therapy: a 
critical review.

Petejova N, Martinek A.

Rhabdomyolysis, a clinical syndrome caused by damage to skeletal muscle and 
release of its breakdown products into the circulation, can be followed by acute 
kidney injury (AKI) as a severe complication. The belief that the AKI is 
triggered by myoglobin as the toxin responsible appears to be oversimplified. 
Better knowledge of the pathophysiology of rhabdomyolysis and following AKI 
could widen treatment options, leading to preservation of the kidney: the 
decision to initiate renal replacement therapy in clinical practice should not 
be made on the basis of the myoglobin or creatine phosphokinase serum 
concentrations.

DOI: 10.1186/cc13897
PMCID: PMC4056317
PMID: 25043142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

============================================================
TOPIC: HEART FAILURE TREATMENT
============================================================
1. Lancet. 2024 Mar 16;403(10431):1083-1092. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)02756-3. 
Epub 2024 Feb 14.

Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: everything the clinician needs 
to know.

Campbell P(1), Rutten FH(2), Lee MM(3), Hawkins NM(4), Petrie MC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Southern Trust, Craigavon Area Hospital, Portadown, 
UK. Electronic address: patriciam.campbell@southerntrust.hscni.net.
(2)Department of General Practice and Nursing Science, Julius Centre, University 
Medical Centre, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands.
(3)School of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Health, University of Glasgow, British 
Heart Foundation Glasgow Cardiovascular Research Centre, Glasgow, UK.
(4)Division of Cardiology, University of British Columbia, Faculty of Medicine, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Erratum in
    Lancet. 2024 Mar 16;403(10431):1026. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(24)00494-X.

Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) is increasingly 
recognised and diagnosed in clinical practice, a trend driven by an ageing 
population and a rise in contributing comorbidities, such as obesity and 
diabetes. Representing at least half of all heart failure cases, HFpEF is 
recognised as a complex clinical syndrome. Its diagnosis and management are 
challenging due to its diverse pathophysiology, varied epidemiological patterns, 
and evolving diagnostic and treatment approaches. This Seminar synthesises the 
latest insights on HFpEF, integrating findings from recent clinical trials, 
epidemiological research, and the latest guideline recommendations. We delve 
into the definition, pathogenesis, epidemiology, diagnostic criteria, and 
management strategies (non-pharmacological and pharmacological) for HFpEF. We 
highlight ongoing clinical trials and future developments in the field. 
Specifically, this Seminar offers practical guidance tailored for primary care 
practitioners, generalists, and cardiologists who do not specialise in heart 
failure, simplifying the complexities in the diagnosis and management of HFpEF. 
We provide practical, evidence-based recommendations, emphasising the importance 
of addressing comorbidities and integrating the latest pharmacological 
treatments, such as SGLT2 inhibitors.

Crown Copyright © 2024 Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)02756-3
PMID: 38367642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests PC reports research 
grants from AstraZeneca; consulting fees from Vifor, Pharmacosmos, and 
Boehringer Ingelheim; and speaker honoraria from Novartis, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
AstraZeneca, Pfizer, Vifor, and Pharmacosmos. FHR reports a speaker honorary 
from Novartis. MMYL's employer, the University of Glasgow, receives grant 
support from AstraZeneca and Boehringer Ingelheim; and he serves on clinical 
endpoint committees for Bayer, and steering committees for Cytokinetics. NMH 
reports research grants from AstraZeneca; consulting fees from AstraZeneca; and 
honoraria from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, and 
Servier. MCP reports research grants from Boehringer Ingelheim, Roche, SQ 
Innovations, AstraZeneca, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Medtronic, Boston Scientific, 
and Pharmacosmos; consulting fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, 
AstraZeneca, Novo Nordisk, AbbVie, Bayer, Takeda, Corvia, Cardiorentis, 
Pharmacosmos, Siemens, and Vifor; and honoraria from Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Novartis, AstraZeneca, Novo Nordisk, AbbVie, Bayer, Takeda, Corvia, 
Cardiorentis, Pharmacosmos, Siemens, and Vifor. MCP is a Director of Global 
Clinical Trial Partners.


2. Circ Res. 2021 May 14;128(10):1468-1486. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.121.318186. 
Epub 2021 May 13.

Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Approaches to Acute Decompensated Heart Failure.

Njoroge JN(1), Teerlink JR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, School of Medicine, University of California San 
Francisco (J.N.N., J.R.T.), San Francisco, CA.
(2)Section of Cardiology, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center 
(J.R.T.), San Francisco, CA.

Acute decompensated heart failure (ADHF) is one of the leading admission 
diagnoses worldwide, yet it is an entity with incompletely understood 
pathophysiology and limited therapeutic options. Patients admitted for ADHF have 
high in-hospital morbidity and mortality, as well as frequent rehospitalizations 
and subsequent cardiovascular death. This devastating clinical course is partly 
due to suboptimal medical management of ADHF with persistent congestion upon 
hospital discharge and inadequate predischarge initiation of life-saving 
guideline-directed therapies. While new drugs for the treatment of chronic HF 
continue to be approved, there has been no new therapy approved for ADHF in 
decades. This review will focus on the current limited understanding of ADHF 
pathophysiology, possible therapeutic targets, and current limitations in 
expanding available therapies in light of the unmet need among these high-risk 
patients.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.121.318186
PMCID: PMC8126502
PMID: 33983837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2023 Jan 31;81(4):413-424. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2022.11.023.

Worsening Heart Failure: Nomenclature, Epidemiology, and Future Directions: 
JACC Review Topic of the Week.

Greene SJ(1), Bauersachs J(2), Brugts JJ(3), Ezekowitz JA(4), Lam CSP(5), Lund 
LH(6), Ponikowski P(7), Voors AA(8), Zannad F(9), Zieroth S(10), Butler J(11).

Author information:
(1)Duke Clinical Research Institute, Durham, North Carolina, USA; Division of 
Cardiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, USA. 
Electronic address: stephen.greene@duke.edu.
(2)Department of Cardiology and Angiology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany.
(3)Division of Cardiology, Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(4)Canadian VIGOUR Centre, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(5)National Heart Centre Singapore and Duke-National University of Singapore, 
Singapore.
(6)Department of Medicine Solna, Unit of Cardiology, Karolinska Institute, Heart 
and Vascular Theme, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland.
(8)Department of Cardiology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(9)Université de Lorraine, Centre d'Investigation Clinique-Plurithématique 
Inserm 1433, Centre Hospitalier Regional Universitaire, Nancy Brabois, France; 
Inserm U1116, CHRU Nancy Brabois, F-CRIN INI-CRCT (Cardiovascular and Renal 
Clinical Trialists), Nancy, France.
(10)University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(11)Baylor Scott and White Research Institute, Dallas, Texas, USA; Department of 
Medicine, University of Mississippi, Jackson, Mississippi, USA. Electronic 
address: javed.butler@bswhealth.org.

Heart failure (HF) is a progressive disease characterized by variable durations 
of symptomatic stability often punctuated by episodes of worsening despite 
continued therapy. These periods of clinical worsening are increasingly 
recognized as a distinct phase in the history of HF, termed worsening HF (WHF). 
The definition of WHF continues to evolve from a historical focus solely on 
hospitalization to now include nonhospitalization events (eg, need for 
intravenous diuretic therapy in the emergency or outpatient setting). Most HF 
clinical trials to date have had HF hospitalization and death as primary 
endpoints, and only recently, some studies have included other WHF events 
regardless of location of care. This article reviews the evolution of the WHF 
definition, highlights the importance of considering the onset of WHF as an 
event that marks a new phase of HF, summarizes the latest clinical trials 
investigating novel therapies, and outlines unmet needs regarding identification 
and treatment of WHF.

Copyright © 2023 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2022.11.023
PMID: 36697141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Funding Support and Author Disclosures This work 
was supported by Bayer AG, Germany. Dr Greene has received research support from 
the Duke University Department of Medicine Chair’s Research Award, American 
Heart Association, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Amgen, 
AstraZeneca, Bristol Myers Squibb, Cytokinetics, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, and 
Sanofi; has served on advisory boards for Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim and Eli Lilly, Bristol Myers Squibb, Cytokinetics, Roche Diagnostics, 
scPharmaceuticals, and Sanofi; has served as a consultant for Amgen, Bayer, 
Boehringer Ingelheim and Eli Lilly, Bristol Myers Squibb, Corteria 
Pharmaceuticals, CSL Vifor, Merck, PharmaIN, Roche Diagnostics, Sanofi, Tricog 
Health, and Urovant Pharmaceuticals; and has received speaker fees from 
Boehringer Ingelheim and Cytokinetics. Dr Bauersachs has received honoraria for 
lectures/consulting from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, BMS, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Cardior, Corvia, CVRx, Novartis, Pfizer, and Vifor; and has received 
institutional research support from Zoll, CVRx, and Abiomed. Dr Brugts has 
received research grants from Abbott and Vifor Pharma; and has received speaker 
fees from or has served on advisory boards for Abbott, Bayer, Boehringer, 
Novartis, and Vifor Pharma. Dr Ezekowitz has received research grants from 
Bayer, Merck, Servier, Amgen, Sanofi, Novartis, Cytokinetics, American Regent, 
and Applied Therapeutics; and has received consulting fees from Bayer, Merck, 
Servier, Amgen, Sanofi, Novartis, Cytokinetics, American Regent, and Applied 
Therapeutics. Dr Lam is supported by a Clinician Scientist Award from the 
National Medical Research Council of Singapore; has received research support 
from Bayer and Roche Diagnostics; has served as consultant or on advisory 
boards/steering committees/executive committees for Actelion, Alleviant Medical, 
Allysta Pharma, Amgen, AnaCardio AB, Applied Therapeutics, AstraZeneca, Bayer, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Boston Scientific, Cytokinetics, Darma Inc, EchoNous Inc, 
Eli Lilly, Impulse Dynamics, Ionis Pharmaceutical, Janssen Research & 
Development LLC, Medscape/WebMD Global LLC, Merck, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, 
ProSciento Inc, Radcliffe Group Ltd, Roche Diagnostics, Sanofi, Siemens 
Healthcare Diagnostics and Us2.ai; and serves as cofounder and nonexecutive 
director of Us2.ai. Dr Lund has received grants from AstraZeneca, Vifor Pharma, 
Boston Scientific, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Novartis; has served as a 
consultant for Merck, Vifor Pharma, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Pharmacosmos, MedScape, 
Sanofi, Lexicon Pharmaceuticals Inc, Myokardia, Boehringer Ingelheim, and 
Servier; has received speaker honoraria from Abbott, MedScape, Radcliffe, 
AstraZeneca, Novartis, and AnaCardio AB; and owns stock in AnaCardio AB. Dr 
Ponikowski has served as consultant or on advisory boards/steering 
committees/executive committees for Abbott Vascular, American Regent, Amgen, 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Cytokinetics, Impulse Dynamics, Merck, 
Novartis, Radcliffe Group Ltd, Servier, and Vifor Pharma. Dr Zieroth has 
received research grant support, served on advisory boards, or been a speaker 
for Abbott, Akcea Therapeutics, Inc., AstraZeneca, Amgen, Alnylam, Bayer, BMS, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Janssen, Merck, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Otsuka, 
Pfizer, Servier, and Vifor Pharma; and has served on a clinical trial steering 
committee or as a national lead for studies sponsored by AstraZeneca, Bayer, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Merck, and Novartis. Dr Butler has served as a consultant 
for Abbott, Adrenomed AG, Amgen, American Regent, Applied Therapeutics, 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, CVRx, G3 
Pharmaceutical, Impulse Dynamics, Innolife, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, LivaNova, 
Medtronic, Merck, Novartis, NovoNordisk, Pfizer, Roche, and Vifor Pharma. All 
other authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to the 
contents of this paper to disclose.


4. Circulation. 2016 Jul 5;134(1):73-90. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.021884.

Phenotype-Specific Treatment of Heart Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction: 
A Multiorgan Roadmap.

Shah SJ(1), Kitzman DW(1), Borlaug BA(1), van Heerebeek L(1), Zile MR(1), Kass 
DA(1), Paulus WJ(2).

Author information:
(1)From Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, and the Feinberg 
Cardiovascular Research Institute, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, IL (S.J.S.); Sections on Cardiovascular Medicine and 
Geriatrics, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC (D.W.K.); Division 
of Cardiovascular Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN, (B.A.B.); Department of Physiology, Institute for Cardiovascular 
Research, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands (L.v.H., 
W.J.P.); Department of Cardiology, Onze Lieve Vrouw Gasthuis, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands (L.v.H.); Department of Medicine, Medical University of South 
Carolina (MUSC) and the RHJ Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 
Charleston (M.R.Z.); and Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, The 
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD (D.A.K.).
(2)From Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, and the Feinberg 
Cardiovascular Research Institute, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, IL (S.J.S.); Sections on Cardiovascular Medicine and 
Geriatrics, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC (D.W.K.); Division 
of Cardiovascular Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN, (B.A.B.); Department of Physiology, Institute for Cardiovascular 
Research, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands (L.v.H., 
W.J.P.); Department of Cardiology, Onze Lieve Vrouw Gasthuis, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands (L.v.H.); Department of Medicine, Medical University of South 
Carolina (MUSC) and the RHJ Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 
Charleston (M.R.Z.); and Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, The 
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD (D.A.K.). wj.paulus@vumc.nl.

Heart failure (HF) with preserved ejection fraction (EF; HFpEF) accounts for 50% 
of HF cases, and its prevalence relative to HF with reduced EF continues to 
rise. In contrast to HF with reduced EF, large trials testing neurohumoral 
inhibition in HFpEF failed to reach a positive outcome. This failure was 
recently attributed to distinct systemic and myocardial signaling in HFpEF and 
to diversity of HFpEF phenotypes. In this review, an HFpEF treatment strategy is 
proposed that addresses HFpEF-specific signaling and phenotypic diversity. In 
HFpEF, extracardiac comorbidities such as metabolic risk, arterial hypertension, 
and renal insufficiency drive left ventricular remodeling and dysfunction 
through systemic inflammation and coronary microvascular endothelial 
dysfunction. The latter affects left ventricular diastolic dysfunction through 
macrophage infiltration, resulting in interstitial fibrosis, and through altered 
paracrine signaling to cardiomyocytes, which become hypertrophied and stiff 
because of low nitric oxide and cyclic guanosine monophosphate. Systemic 
inflammation also affects other organs such as lungs, skeletal muscle, and 
kidneys, leading, respectively, to pulmonary hypertension, muscle weakness, and 
sodium retention. Individual steps of these signaling cascades can be targeted 
by specific interventions: metabolic risk by caloric restriction, systemic 
inflammation by statins, pulmonary hypertension by phosphodiesterase 5 
inhibitors, muscle weakness by exercise training, sodium retention by diuretics 
and monitoring devices, myocardial nitric oxide bioavailability by inorganic 
nitrate-nitrite, myocardial cyclic guanosine monophosphate content by neprilysin 
or phosphodiesterase 9 inhibition, and myocardial fibrosis by spironolactone. 
Because of phenotypic diversity in HFpEF, personalized therapeutic strategies 
are proposed, which are configured in a matrix with HFpEF presentations in the 
abscissa and HFpEF predispositions in the ordinate.

© 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.021884
PMCID: PMC4930115
PMID: 27358439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. ESC Heart Fail. 2021 Dec;8(6):4444-4453. doi: 10.1002/ehf2.13646. Epub 2021
Oct  16.

'Time is prognosis' in heart failure: time-to-treatment initiation as a 
modifiable risk factor.

Abdin A(1), Anker SD(2), Butler J(3), Coats AJS(4), Kindermann I(1), Lainscak 
M(5)(6)(7), Lund LH(8), Metra M(9), Mullens W(10), Rosano G(11), Slawik J(1), 
Wintrich J(1), Böhm M(1).

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Innere Medizin III-Kardiologie, Angiologie und Internistische 
Intensivmedizin, Universitätsklinikum des Saarlandes, Kirrberger Strasse 100, 
Homburg, 66421, Germany.
(2)Department of Cardiology & Berlin Institute of Health Center for Regenerative 
Therapies (BCRT), German Centre for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), partner site 
Berlin, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin (Campus CVK), Berlin, Germany.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, 
MS, USA.
(4)University of Warwick, Coventry, UK.
(5)Division of Cardiology, General Hospital Murska Sobota, Murska Sobota, 
Slovenia.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(7)Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, University of Maribor, Maribor, 
Slovenia.
(8)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(9)Department of Cardiology, University and Civil Hospitals of Brescia, Brescia, 
Italy.
(10)Department of Cardiology, Ziekenhuis Oost-Limburg (ZOL), Genk, Belgium.
(11)Department of Medical Sciences, IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Rome, Italy.

In heart failure (HF), acute decompensation can occur quickly and unexpectedly 
because of worsening of chronic HF or to new-onset HF diagnosed for the first 
time ('de novo'). Patients presenting with acute HF (AHF) have a poor prognosis 
comparable with those with acute myocardial infarction, and any delay of 
treatment initiation is associated with worse outcomes. Recent HF guidelines and 
recommendations have highlighted the importance of a timely diagnosis and 
immediate treatment for patients presenting with AHF to decrease disease 
progression and improve prognosis. However, based on the available data, there 
is still uncertainty regarding the optimal 'time-to-treatment' effect in AHF. 
Furthermore, the immediate post-worsening HF period plays an important role in 
clinical outcomes in HF patients after hospitalization and is known as the 
'vulnerable phase' characterized by high risk of readmission and early death. 
Early and intensive treatment for HF patients in the 'vulnerable phase' might be 
associated with lower rates of early readmission and mortality. Additionally, in 
the chronic stable HF outpatient, treatments are often delayed or not initiated 
when symptoms are stable, ignoring the risk for adverse outcomes such as sudden 
death. Consequently, there is a dire need to better identify HF patients during 
hospitalization and after discharge and treating them adequately to improve 
their prognosis. HF is an urgent clinical scenario along all its stages and 
disease conditions. Therefore, time plays a significant role throughout the 
entire patient's journey. Therapy should be optimized as soon as possible, 
because this is beneficial regardless of severity or duration of HF. Time 
lavished before treatment initiation is recognized as important modifiable risk 
factor in HF.

© 2021 The Authors. ESC Heart Failure published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1002/ehf2.13646
PMCID: PMC8712849
PMID: 34655282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.A. received speaker's honoraria from Novartis 
and travel grants from Biotronik and Novartis. S.D.A. received honoraria for 
lectures and scientific advice from Vifor, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Novartis, Servier, Abbott, Actimed, Cardiac Dimensions, and Impulse Dynamics. 
J.B. received honoraria for lectures and scientific advice from Abbott, 
Adrenomed, Amgen, Applied Therapeutics, Array, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, CVRx, G3 Pharma, Novartis, BI‐Lilly, and Janssen. A.J.S.C. received 
grants and personal fees from Vifor International and personal fees from 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Menarini, Novartis, Nutricia, Servier, 
Vifor, Abbott, Actimed, Arena, Cardiac Dimensions, Corvia, CVRx, Enopace, ESN 
Cleer, Faraday, Gore, Impulse Dynamics, and Respicardia. I.K. reports personal 
fees from Akcea Therapeutics Germany GmbH, AstraZeneca, Bayer Vital GmbH, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb Company, Hexal AG, Novartis, Pfizer 
Pharma GmbH, Servier Deutschland GmbH, Vifor, and Daiichi Sankyo Deutschland 
GmbH. M.L. reports personal fees from AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Vifor Pharma, and Novartis. L.H.L. received grants and personal fees from 
Relypsa, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Novartis, grants from Boston Scientific, and 
personal fees from Merck, Vifor Fresenius, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Pharmacosmos, 
Abbott, Medscape, Myokardia, Sanofi, Lexicon, and Mundipharma. M.M. received 
personal fees and non‐financial support from Amgen, Abbott Vascular, and Bayer 
and personal fees from Servier, AstraZeneca, Edwards Therapeutics, Vifor Pharma, 
Actelion, LivaNova, and Windtree Therapeutics. W.M. received research grants 
from Novartis, Vifor, Medtronic, Biotronik, Abbott, and Boston Scientific. M.B. 
reports personal fees from Abbott, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Cytokinetics, Medtronic, Novartis, Servier, and Vifor.


6. JACC Heart Fail. 2024 Jul;12(7):1141-1156. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2024.03.020.

Practical Guidance for Hemodynamic Assessment by Right Heart Catheterization in 
Management of Heart Failure.

Rajagopalan N(1), Borlaug BA(2), Bailey AL(3), Eckman PM(4), Guglin M(5), Hall 
S(6), Montgomery M(7), Ramani G(8), Khazanie P(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA. 
Electronic address: nra224@uky.edu.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, 
USA.
(3)Centennial Heart at Parkridge, Chattanooga, Tennessee, USA.
(4)Alina Health Minneapolis Heart Institute, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(5)Krannert Cardiovascular Research Center, Indiana University, Indianapolis, 
Indiana, USA.
(6)Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(7)Division of Cardiology, Newark Beth Israel Medical Center, Newark, New 
Jersey, USA.
(8)Division of Cardiology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(9)Division of Cardiology, University of Colorado-Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, Colorado, USA.

Heart failure is a clinical syndrome characterized by the inability of the heart 
to meet the circulatory demands of the body without requiring an increase in 
intracardiac pressures at rest or with exertion. Hemodynamic parameters can be 
measured via right heart catheterization, which has an integral role in the full 
spectrum of heart failure: from ambulatory patients to those in cardiogenic 
shock, as well as patients being considered for left ventricular device therapy 
and heart transplantation. Hemodynamic data are critical for prompt recognition 
of clinical deterioration, assessment of prognosis, and guidance of treatment 
decisions. This review is a field guide for hemodynamic assessment, 
troubleshooting, and interpretation for clinicians treating patients with heart 
failure.

Copyright © 2024 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jchf.2024.03.020
PMID: 38960519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Funding Support and Author Disclosures Dr 
Rajagopalan has served as a consultant for Abbott Laboratories. Dr Borlaug is 
supported by R01 HL128526, R01 HL162828, and U01 HL160226 from the National 
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and W81XWH2210245 from the United States 
Department of Defense, as well as research grant funding from AstraZeneca, Axon, 
Medtronic, Novo Nordisk, and Tenax Therapeutics, and has served as a consultant 
for Amgen, Aria, BD, Boehringer Ingelheim, Cytokinetics, Edwards Lifesciences, 
Eli Lilly, Merck, Novo Nordisk, NGM, NXT, and VADovations, and is named inventor 
(US Patent number 10,307,179) for the tools and approach for a minimally 
invasive pericardial modification procedure to treat heart failure. Dr Bailey 
has served as a consultant for OptumRx and Nordisk. Dr Eckman has served as a 
consultant for Daxor. Dr Hall has served as a consultant for Abbott 
Laboratories, Abiomed, Evaheart, CareDx, and Natera. Dr Ramani has served as a 
consultant for Merck and has received research grant funding from United 
Therapeutics and Janssen. Dr Khazanie has research grant support from the 
National Institutes of Health (K23 HL145122) and the University of Colorado’s 
Ludeman Family Center for Women’s Health Research. All other authors have 
reported that they have no relationships relevant to the contents of this paper 
to disclose.


7. Lancet. 2024 Sep 7;404(10456):949-961. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(24)01643-X.
Epub  2024 Aug 30.

Semaglutide versus placebo in patients with heart failure and mildly reduced or 
preserved ejection fraction: a pooled analysis of the SELECT, FLOW, STEP-HFpEF, 
and STEP-HFpEF DM randomised trials.

Kosiborod MN(1), Deanfield J(2), Pratley R(3), Borlaug BA(4), Butler J(5), 
Davies MJ(6), Emerson SS(7), Kahn SE(8), Kitzman DW(9), Lingvay I(10), Mahaffey 
KW(11), Petrie MC(12), Plutzky J(13), Rasmussen S(14), Rönnbäck C(14), Shah 
SJ(15), Verma S(16), Weeke PE(14), Lincoff AM(17); SELECT, FLOW, STEP-HFpEF, and 
STEP-HFpEF DM Trial Committees and Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Saint Luke's Mid America Heart 
Institute, University of Missouri-Kansas City School of Medicine, Kansas City, 
MO, USA. Electronic address: mkosiborod@saint-lukes.org.
(2)Institute of Cardiovascular Science, University College London, London, UK.
(3)AdventHealth Translational Research Institute, Orlando, FL, USA.
(4)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(5)Baylor Scott & White Research Institute, Dallas, TX, USA; Department of 
Medicine, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS, USA.
(6)Diabetes Research Centre, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK; National 
Institute for Health Research Leicester Biomedical Research Centre, Leicester, 
UK.
(7)Department of Biostatistics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(8)Department of Medicine, VA Puget Sound Health Care System and University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(9)Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, USA.
(10)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(11)Stanford Center for Clinical Research, Stanford School of Medicine, Palo 
Alto, CA, USA.
(12)School of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Health, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, UK.
(13)Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(14)Novo Nordisk, Søborg, Denmark.
(15)Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(16)Division of Cardiac Surgery, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute of St Michael's 
Hospital, Unity Health Toronto, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(17)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of 
Medicine of Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2024 Sep 7;404(10456):909-911. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(24)01763-X.

BACKGROUND: Heart failure with mildly reduced or preserved ejection fraction 
(hereafter referred to as HFpEF) is the most common type of heart failure and is 
associated with a high risk of hospitalisation and death, especially in patients 
with overweight, obesity, or type 2 diabetes. In the STEP-HFpEF and STEP-HFpEF 
DM trials, semaglutide improved heart failure-related symptoms and physical 
limitations in participants with HFpEF. Whether semaglutide also reduces 
clinical heart failure events in this group remains to be established.
METHODS: We conducted a post-hoc pooled, participant-level analysis of four 
randomised, placebo-controlled trials (SELECT, FLOW, STEP-HFpEF, and STEP-HFpEF 
DM) to examine the effects of once-weekly subcutaneous semaglutide (2·4 mg in 
SELECT, STEP-HFpEF, and STEP-HFpEF DM; 1·0 mg in FLOW) on heart failure events. 
The STEP-HFpEF and STEP-HFpF DM trials enrolled participants with 
obesity-related HFpEF, the SELECT trial enrolled participants with 
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease and overweight or obesity, and the FLOW 
trial enrolled participants with type 2 diabetes and chronic kidney disease. 
Hence, for this analysis, we include all participants from the STEP-HFpEF trials 
and those with an investigator-reported history of HFpEF from SELECT and FLOW. 
The main outcomes for this analysis were the composite endpoint of time to 
cardiovascular death or first worsening heart failure event (defined as 
hospitalisation or urgent visit due to heart failure), time to first worsening 
heart failure event, and time to cardiovascular death. Efficacy and safety 
endpoints were analysed with the full analysis set (ie, all participants 
randomly assigned to treatment, according to the intention-to-treat principle). 
The SELECT, FLOW, STEP-HFpEF, and STEP-HFpEF DM trials are registered at 
ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03574597, NCT03819153, NCT04788511, and NCT04916470, 
respectively, and all are complete.
FINDINGS: Across the four trials, 3743 (16·8%) of 22 282 participants had a 
history of HFpEF (1914 assigned to semaglutide and 1829 assigned to placebo). In 
this group of participants with HFpEF, semaglutide reduced the risk of the 
combined endpoint of cardiovascular death or heart failure events (103 [5·4%] of 
1914 in the semaglutide group had events vs 138 [7·5%] of 1829 in the placebo 
group; hazard ratio [HR] 0·69 [95% CI 0·53-0·89]; p=0·0045). Semaglutide also 
reduced the risk of worsening heart failure events (54 [2·8%] vs 86 [4·7%]; HR 
0·59 [0·41-0·82]; p=0·0019). No significant effect on cardiovascular death alone 
was seen (59 [3·1%] vs 67 [3·7%]; HR 0·82 [0·57-1·16]; p=0·25). A lower 
proportion of patients treated with semaglutide had serious adverse events than 
did those who were treated with placebo (572 [29·9%] vs 708 [38·7%]).
INTERPRETATION: In patients with HFpEF, semaglutide reduced the risk of the 
combined endpoint of cardiovascular death or worsening heart failure events, and 
worsening heart failure events alone, whereas its effect on cardiovascular death 
alone was not significant. These data support the use of semaglutide as an 
efficacious therapy to reduce the risk of clinical heart failure events in 
patients with HFpEF, for whom few treatment options are currently available.
FUNDING: Novo Nordisk.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved, including those for text and 
data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(24)01643-X
PMID: 39222642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests MNK has served as a 
consultant for 35Pharma, Alnylam, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Cytokinetics, Corcept Therapeutics, Dexcom, Eli Lilly, Esperion 
Therapeutics, Imbria Pharmaceuticals, Janssen, Lexicon Pharmaceuticals, Merck 
(Diabetes and Cardiovascular), Novo Nordisk, Pharmacosmos, Pfizer, Regeneron, 
scPharmaceuticals, Structure Therapeutics, Vifor Pharma, and Youngene 
Therapeutics; has served on a data monitoring board for Applied Therapeutics; 
has served on an advisory board for Alnylam, Amgen, Arrowhead Pharmaceuticals, 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Corcept Therapeutics, Eli Lilly, 
Esperion Therapeutics, Merck (Diabetes and Cardiovascular), Novo Nordisk, and 
Sanofi; has received research grants from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, and 
Pfizer; holds stocks in Artera Health and Saghmos Therapeutics; has received 
honoraria from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Novo Nordisk; and has 
received support for data analyses from AstraZeneca and Vifor. JD has received 
consulting honoraria from Aegerion, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Merck, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, Sanofi, and Takeda and 
research grants from Aegerion, British Heart Foundation, Colgate, UK Medical 
Research Council, MSD, National Institute for Health and Care Research, Pfizer, 
Public Health England, and Roche. RP reports speaker fees from Eli Lilly, Lilly 
USA, and Novo Nordisk; consulting fees from AbbVie, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Bayer 
HealthCare Pharmaceuticals, Corcept Therapeutics, Dexcom, Endogenex, Gasherbrum 
Bio, Genprex, Getz Pharma, Hanmi Pharmaceutical, Hengrui (USA), Intas 
Pharmaceuticals, Eli Lilly, Lilly USA, Merck, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, Rivus 
Pharmaceuticals, Scholar Rock, and Sun Pharmaceutical Industries; and grants 
from Biomea Fusion, Carmot Therapeutics, Dompe, Endogenex, Fractyl, Eli Lilly, 
Novo Nordisk, and Sanofi. All grants are directed to RP's institution. Up to Dec 
31, 2023, payment for RP's consultant and speaker services was made directly to 
his employer, AdventHealth, a nonprofit entity; as of Jan 1, 2024, payment was 
directed to RP personally. BAB receives research support from the US National 
Institutes of Health and the US Department of Defense, as well as research grant 
funding from AstraZeneca, Axon Therapies, GlaxoSmithKline, Medtronic, Mesoblast, 
Novo Nordisk, Rivus, and Tenax Therapeutics; he has served as a consultant for 
Actelion, Amgen, Aria, Axon Therapies, BD, Boehringer Ingelheim, Cytokinetics, 
Edwards Lifesciences, Eli Lilly, Imbria, Janssen, Merck, NGM, Novo Nordisk, NXT, 
and VADovations; and is named inventor (US patent number 10,307,179) for the 
tools and approach for a minimally invasive pericardial modification procedure 
to treat heart failure. JB is a consultant to Abbott, American Regent, Amgen, 
Applied Therapeutics, AskBio, Astellas, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Boston Scientific, Bristol Myers Squibb, Cardiac Dimension, 
CardioCell, Cardior, CSL Behring, CVRx, Cytokinetics, Daxor, Edwards 
Lifesciences, Element Science, Faraday, Foundry, G3P, Imbria, Impulse Dynamics, 
Innolife, Inventiva, Ionis, Levator, Lexicon, Lilly, LivaNova, Janssen, 
Medtronics, Merck, Occlutech, Owkin, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, 
Pharmacosmos, PharmaIN, Prolaio, Pulnovo, Regeneron, Renibus, Roche, Salamandra, 
Salubris, Sanofi, scPharmaceuticals, Secretome, Sequana, SQ Innovation, Tenex, 
Tricog, Ultromics, Vifor, and Zoll. MJD has acted as a consultant, advisory 
board member, and speaker for Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Novo Nordisk, and 
Sanofi; an advisory board member for AstraZeneca, Carmot/Roche, Medtronic, 
Pfizer, and Zealand Pharma; and a speaker for Amgen and AstraZeneca; and has 
received grants from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Janssen, Novo 
Nordisk, and Sanofi-Aventis. SSE has received consulting fees from Amylyx, 
AstraZeneca, Avillion, Ayala, Bayer, BeiGene, Boehringer Ingelheim, 89 Bio, 
BioAge, BioAtla, Bristol Meyer Squibb, BridgeBio, Daiichi Sankyo, Denovo, Fore 
Therapeutics, GlaxoSmithKline, Inovio, Insmed, Ipsen, Karuna, Lilly, Lundbeck, 
Mirati, Moderna, Novartis, Novavax, Novo Nordisk, National Surgical Adjuvant 
Breast and Bowel Project, Pfizer, Principia, Reata, Rebiotx, Roche, Sanofi, 
solvd, Sutro Biopharma, and TG Therapeutics. SEK received consulting fees from 
Casma Therapeutics, Oramed, and Third Rock Ventures; and served on an advisory 
board for AltPep, Anji Pharmaceuticals, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, 
Intarcia, Merck, and Novo Nordisk. He has received stock options from AltPep. DK 
was supported in part by the Kermit Glenn Phillips II Chair in Cardiovascular 
Medicine and US National Institutes of Health grants U01AG076928, R01AG078153, 
R01AG045551, R01AG18915, P30AG021332, U24AG059624, and U01HL160272; and received 
honoraria as a consultant for AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Corvia 
Medical, Ketyo, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, and Rivus; grant funding from 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, and Rivus; and has stock 
ownership in Gilead Sciences. IL has received research grants from Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Merck, Mylan Pharmaceuticals, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, and Sanofi; 
served as a consultant for AstraZeneca, Bayer Healthcare Pharmaceuticals, 
Biomea, Boehringer Ingelheim, Carmot, Eli Lilly, Intarcia, Intercept 
Pharmaceuticals, Janssen Global Services, Johnson & Johnson Medical Devices & 
Diagnostics Group—Latin America, MannKind, Merck, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, Sanofi, 
Shionogi, Structure Therapeutics, Target Pharma, Valeritas, and Zealand Pharma; 
and received travel expenses from Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Johnson & 
Johnson Medical Devices & Diagnostics Group—Latin America, Novo Nordisk, Sanofi, 
and Zealand Pharma. KWM has received grants from AHA, Apple, Bayer, California 
Institute for Regenerative Medicine, CSL Behring, Eidos, Ferring, Gilead, 
Google, Idorsia, Johnson & Johnson, Luitpold, Novartis, PAC-12, Precordior, and 
Sanifit; and consulting fees from Applied Therapeutics, Bayer, BMS, BridgeBio, 
CSL Behring, Elsevier, Fosun Pharma, Human, Johnson & Johnson, Moderna, 
Myokardia, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Otsuka, Phasebio, Portola, Quidel, and 
Theravance; and holds stock options for Human, Medeloop, Precordior, and 
Regencor. MCP was supported by the British Heart Foundation Centre of Research 
Excellence Grant RE/18/6/34217; has received research funding from AstraZeneca, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Boston Scientific, Medtronic, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, 
Pharmacosmos, Roche, and SQ Innovations; and served on committees or consulted 
for AbbVie, Akero, AnaCardio, Applied Therapeutics, AstraZeneca, Bayer, 
Biosensors, Boehringer Ingelheim, Cardiorentis, Corvia, Eli Lilly, Horizon 
Therapeutics, LIB Therapeutics, Moderna, New Amsterdam, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, 
Pharmacosmos, Siemens, SQ Innovations, Takeda, Teikoku, and Vifor. JP has 
received consulting fees from Altimmune, Amgen, Esperion Therapeutics, Merck, 
MJH Life Sciences, Novartis, and Novo Nordisk and received a grant, paid to his 
institution, from Boehringer Ingelheim. CR, SR, and PEW are employees and SR and 
PEW are shareholders of Novo Nordisk. SJS has received research grants from 
AstraZeneca, Corvia, and Pfizer; and consulting fees from Abbott, Alleviant, 
Amgen, Aria CV, AstraZeneca, Axon Therapies, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Boston 
Scientific, Bristol Myers Squibb, Cyclerion, Cytokinetics, Edwards Lifesciences, 
Eidos, Imara, Impulse Dynamics, Intellia, Ionis, Lilly, Merck, MyoKardia, 
Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, Prothena, ReCor, Regeneron, Rivus, Sardocor, 
Shifamed, Tenax, Tenaya, and Ultromics. SV reports speaking honoraria or 
consulting fees from Abbott, Amarin, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Canadian Medical and Surgical Knowledge Translation Research Group, Eli Lilly, 
HLS Therapeutics, Janssen, Merck, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, PhaseBio, and 
TIMI. AML has received research grants from AbbVie, AstraZeneca, CSL Behring, 
Eli Lilly, Esperion Therapeutics, and Novartis, paid to his institution; and 
consulting fees from Akebia Therapeutics, Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Ardelyx, Eli 
Lilly, FibroGen, GlaxoSmithKline, Intarcia, Medtronic Vascular, Novartis, Novo 
Nordisk, Provention Bio, Amgen, and ReCor Medical. All other authors declare no 
competing interests.


8. Heart Fail Rev. 2021 Jul;26(4):749-762. doi: 10.1007/s10741-020-10067-5. Epub 
2021 Jan 12.

Device-based treatment options for heart failure with preserved ejection 
fraction.

Miyagi C(1), Miyamoto T(1), Karimov JH(1), Starling RC(2)(3), Fukamachi K(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland 
Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH, 44195, USA.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Miller Family Heart and Vascular 
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(3)Kaufman Center for Heart Failure Treatment and Recovery, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, OH, USA.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland 
Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH, 44195, USA. fukamak@ccf.org.

Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) is a syndrome with an 
unfavorable prognosis, and the number of the patients continues to grow. Because 
there is no effective therapy established as a standard, including 
pharmacological treatments, a movement to develop and evaluate device-based 
therapies is an important emerging area in the treatment of HFpEF patients. Many 
devices have set their target to reduce the left atrial pressure or pulmonary 
capillary wedge pressure because they are strongly related to the symptoms and 
prognosis of HFpEF, but the methodology to achieve it varies based on the 
devices. In this review, we summarize and categorize these devices into the 
following: (1) interatrial shunt devices, (2) left ventricle expander, (3) 
electrical therapy, (4) left ventricular assist devices, and (5) mechanical 
circulatory support devices under development. Here, we describe the features 
and specifications of device-based therapies currently under development and 
those at more advanced stages of preclinical testing. Advantages and limitations 
of these technologies, with insights on their safety and feasibility for HFpEF 
patients, are described.

DOI: 10.1007/s10741-020-10067-5
PMID: 33432418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Eur J Heart Fail. 2016 Jun;18(6):716-26. doi: 10.1002/ejhf.531. Epub 2016 Apr 
29.

A systems BIOlogy Study to TAilored Treatment in Chronic Heart Failure: 
rationale, design, and baseline characteristics of BIOSTAT-CHF.

Voors AA(1), Anker SD(2), Cleland JG(3), Dickstein K(4)(5), Filippatos G(6), van 
der Harst P(1), Hillege HL(1), Lang CC(7), Ter Maaten JM(1), Ng L(8), Ponikowski 
P(9), Samani NJ(8), van Veldhuisen DJ(1), Zannad F(10), Zwinderman AH(11), Metra 
M(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, University of Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9713, GZ, 
Groningen, the Netherlands.
(2)Innovative Clinical Trials, Department of Cardiology and Pneumology, 
University Medical Centre Göttingen (UMG), Göttingen, Germany.
(3)National Heart & Lung Institute, Royal Brompton and Harefield Hospitals, 
Imperial College, London, UK.
(4)University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(5)University of Stavanger, Stavanger, Norway.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Heart Failure Unit, Athens University Hospital 
Attikon, Athens, Greece.
(7)School of Medicine Centre for Cardiovascular and Lung Biology, Division of 
Medical Sciences, University of Dundee, Ninewells Hospital & Medical School, 
Dundee, UK.
(8)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Leicester, Glenfield 
Hospital, and NIHR Leicester Cardiovascular Biomedical Research Unit, Glenfield 
Hospital, Leicester, LE3 9QP, UK.
(9)Department of Heart Diseases, Wroclaw Medical University, Poland and 
Cardiology Department, Military Hospital, Wroclaw, Poland.
(10)Inserm CIC 1433, Université de Lorrain, CHU de Nancy, Nancy, France.
(11)Department of Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Academic 
Medical Centre, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(12)Institute of Cardiology, Department of Medical and Surgical Specialties, 
Radiological Sciences and Public Health, University of Brescia, Italy.

AIMS: Despite major improvements in pharmacological and device treatments, heart 
failure remains a syndrome with high morbidity and mortality, poor quality of 
life, and high health-care costs. Given the extensive heterogeneity among 
patients with heart failure, substantial differences in the response to therapy 
can be expected. We hypothesize that individualized therapy is an essential next 
step to improve outcomes in patients with heart failure.
METHODS: The BIOlogy Study to TAilored Treatment in Chronic Heart Failure 
(BIOSTAT-CHF) included 2516 patients with worsening signs and/or symptoms of 
heart failure from 11 European countries, who were considered to be on 
suboptimal medical treatment. Another 1738 patients from Scotland were included 
in a validation cohort. Overall, both patient cohorts were well matched. The 
majority of patients were hospitalized for acute heart failure, and the 
remainder presented with worsening signs and/or symptoms of heart failure at 
outpatient clinics. Approximately half of the patients were in New York Heart 
Association class III, and 7% vs 34% of patients of the index vs validation 
cohort had heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. According to study 
design, all patients used diuretics, but owing to the inclusion criteria of both 
cohorts, patients were not on optimal, evidence-based medical therapy. In the 
follow-up phase, uptitration to guideline-recommended doses was encouraged.
CONCLUSION: By using a novel systems biology approach, incorporating 
demographics, biomarkers, genome-wide analysis, and proteomics, a model that 
predicts response to therapy will be developed, which should be instrumental in 
developing alternative therapies for patients with suboptimal response to 
currently recommended therapies and thus further improve care for patients with 
heart failure.

© 2016 The Authors European Journal of Heart Failure © 2016 European Society of 
Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1002/ejhf.531
PMID: 27126231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Crit Care Nurs Clin North Am. 2022 Jun;34(2):157-164. doi: 
10.1016/j.cnc.2022.02.005. Epub 2022 Apr 28.

Depression and Heart Failure Assessment, Treatment, and Interventions to Improve 
Self-Care Behaviors.

Wick LL(1).

Author information:
(1)Fairview Health Services, American Association of Heart Failure Nurses, 2450 
Riverside Ave, Minneapolis, MN, USA. Electronic address: 
Linda.wick@fairview.org.

Many people with heart failure also have untreated depression. Because 
depression can lead to worse self-care and increased morbidity and mortality for 
patients with heart failure, identification and treatment are essential. Nurses 
in clinic and inpatient settings are uniquely positioned to implement depression 
screening and advocate for evidence-based treatment for heart failure patients 
with depression. Treatments may include pharmacologic therapies, cognitive 
behavioral therapy, exercise, including cardiac rehabilitation, and social 
support. Adequate screening, treatment, and education by nurses have the 
potential to improve self-care for heart failure patients, thus improving 
morbidity and mortality of this vulnerable population.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cnc.2022.02.005
PMID: 35660229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

============================================================
TOPIC: PNEUMONIA CLINICAL
============================================================
1. JAMA Netw Open. 2024 Jan 2;7(1):e2351511. doi: 
10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2023.51511.

Effectiveness of an Advance Care Planning Intervention in Adults Receiving 
Dialysis and Their Families: A Cluster Randomized Clinical Trial.

Song MK(1), Manatunga A(2), Plantinga L(3)(4), Metzger M(5), Kshirsagar 
AV(6)(7), Lea J(8), Abdel-Rahman EM(9), Jhamb M(10), Wu E(2), Englert J(2), Ward 
SE(11).

Author information:
(1)Center for Nursing Excellence in Palliative Care, Nell Hodgson Woodruff 
School of Nursing, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia.
(2)Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of California, 
San Francisco.
(4)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of California, San 
Francisco.
(5)School of Nursing, University of Virginia, Charlottesville.
(6)UNC Kidney Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of 
Medicine.
(7)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill School of Medicine.
(8)Division of Renal Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Emory 
University, Atlanta, Georgia.
(9)Division of Nephrology, University of Virginia School of Medicine, University 
of Virginia, Charlottesville.
(10)Division of Renal-Electrolyte, Department of Medicine, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(11)School of Nursing, University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Comment in
    JAMA Netw Open. 2024 Jan 2;7(1):e2352415. doi: 
10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2023.52415.

IMPORTANCE: Evidence of effectiveness of advance care planning (ACP) strategies 
for patients receiving dialysis and their families is needed.
OBJECTIVES: To test the effectiveness of an ACP intervention to prepare patients 
and their surrogates for end-of-life (EOL) decision-making and to improve 
surrogate bereavement outcomes.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This cluster randomized clinical trial, An 
Effectiveness-Implementation Trial of SPIRIT (Sharing Patients' Illness 
Representations to Increase Trust) in ESRD, was conducted from December 2017 to 
March 2023 and included 42 dialysis clinics in 5 US states (Georgia, New Mexico, 
North Carolina, Pennsylvania, and Virginia) randomized to provide intervention 
or usual care. Recruitment was from February 15, 2018, to January 31, 2022, and 
patient-surrogate dyads were followed up for 21 months (until January 17, 2023) 
or until patient death.
INTERVENTION: Each clinic selected 1 or 2 health care workers (eg, nurse 
practitioner, registered nurse, or social worker) to conduct 45- to 60-minute 
ACP discussions with dyads in the clinic or remotely. After March 13, 2020 
(commencement of the COVID-19 emergency declaration), all discussions were 
conducted remotely. An ACP summary was placed in patients' medical records.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary, 2-week preparedness outcomes were dyad 
congruence on EOL goals of care, patient decisional conflict, surrogate 
decision-making confidence, and a composite of dyad congruence and surrogate 
decision-making confidence. Secondary bereavement outcomes were anxiety, 
depression, and posttraumatic distress 3 months after patient death. To adjust 
for COVID-19 pandemic effects on bereavement outcomes, a variable to indicate 
the timing of baseline and 3-month assessment relative to the COVID-19 emergency 
declaration was created.
RESULTS: Of the 426 dyads enrolled, 231 were in the intervention clinics, and 
195 were in the control clinics. Among all dyads, the mean (SD) patient age was 
61.9 (12.7) years, and the mean (SD) surrogate age was 53.7 (15.4) years. At 2 
weeks, after adjusting for baseline values, dyad congruence (odds ratio [OR], 
1.61; 95% CI, 1.12-2.31; P = .001), decisional conflict scores (β, -0.10; 95% 
CI, -0.13 to -0.07; P < .001), and the composite (OR, 1.57; 95% CI, 1.06-2.34; 
P = .03) were higher in the intervention group than in the control group. 
Surrogate decision-making confidence was similar between groups (β, 0.06; 95% 
CI, -0.01 to 0.13; P = .12). Among 77 bereaved surrogates, after adjusting for 
baseline values and assessment timing, intervention group anxiety was lower than 
control group anxiety (β, -1.55; 95% CI, -3.08 to -0.01; P = .05); however, 
depression (β, -0.18; 95% CI, -2.09 to 1.73; P = .84) and posttraumatic distress 
(β, -0.96; 95% CI, -7.39 to 5.46; P = .75) were similar.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this randomized clinical trial, the ACP 
intervention implemented by health care workers at dialysis centers improved 
preparation for EOL decision-making but showed mixed effectiveness on 
bereavement outcomes. The ACP intervention implemented in dialysis centers may 
be an effective strategy to the dyad preparation for end-of-life care as opposed 
to the current focus on advance directives.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03138564.

DOI: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2023.51511
PMCID: PMC10828909
PMID: 38289604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Song 
reported being the principal investigator (PI) of the SPIRIT trial. Dr Plantinga 
reported receiving salary support from the National Institute of Nursing 
Research (NINR), National Institutes of Health (NIH), as a study coinvestigator 
during the conduct of the study. Dr Metzger reported receiving salary support 
from the NINR as a study coinvestigator and being a site PI during the conduct 
of the study. Dr Kshirsagar reported receiving salary support from the NINR as a 
study coinvestigator and being a site PI during the conduct of the study and 
receiving royalties from UpToDate outside the submitted work. Dr Lea reported 
receiving salary support from the NINR as a study coinvestigator during the 
conduct of the study. Dr Jhamb reported receiving salary support from the NINR 
as a study coinvestigator and being a site PI during the conduct of the study 
and receiving grants from Dialysis Clinic, Inc outside the submitted work. Dr 
Ward reported receiving salary support from the NINR as a study coinvestigator 
during the conduct of the study. No other disclosures were reported.


2. Salud Publica Mex. 2022 Aug 19;64(5, sept-oct):464-470. doi: 10.21149/13549.

SARS-CoV-2 vaccination patterns in a private hematology and internal medicine 
outpatient clinic.

[Article in Spanish]

García-Villaseñor E(1), Bojalil-Álvarez L(2), Reyes-Cisneros OA(3), 
Fernández-Gutiérrez JA(4), Sánchez-Bonilla D(5), Robles-Nasta M(6), 
Gallardo-Pérez MM(7), Murrieta-Álvarez I(8), Ruiz-Delgado GJ(9), Ruiz-Argüelles 
GJ(10).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Hematología y Medicina Interna, Clínica Ruiz/Benemérita Universidad 
Autónoma de Puebla. Puebla, Mexico. eli95_gv@hotmail.com.
(2)Centro de Hematología y Medicina Interna, Clínica Ruiz/Universidad Popular 
Autónoma del Estado de Puebla. Puebla, Mexico. lorena.bojalil@outlook.es.
(3)Centro de Hematología y Medicina Interna, Clínica Ruiz/Universidad Anáhuac 
Puebla. Puebla, Mexico. oreyesc98@gmail.com.
(4)Centro de Hematología y Medicina Interna, Clínica Ruiz/Universidad Popular 
Autónoma del Estado de Puebla. Puebla, Mexico. 
joseantonio.fernandez02@upaep.edu.mx.
(5)Centro de Hematología y Medicina Interna, Clínica Ruiz. Puebla, Mexico. 
gruiz1@clinicaruiz.com.
(6)Universidad Popular Autónoma del Estado de Puebla. Puebla, Mexico. 
maxrobles98@hotmail.com.
(7)Centro de Hematología y Medicina Interna, Clínica Ruiz/Universidad Popular 
Autónoma del Estado de Puebla. Puebla, Mexico. gruiz1@clinicaruiz.com.
(8)Centro de Hematología y Medicina Interna, Clínica Ruiz/Universidad Popular 
Autónoma del Estado de Puebla. Puebla, Mexico. imurrieta@hsctmexico.com.
(9)Centro de Hematología y Medicina Interna, Clínica Ruiz/Universidad Popular 
Autónoma del Estado de Puebla/Laboratorios Ruiz. Puebla, Mexico. 
gruiz2@clinicaruiz.com.
(10)Universidad Popular Autónoma del Estado de Puebla/Laboratorios Ruiz. Puebla, 
Mexico. gruiz1@clinicaruiz.com.

OBJECTIVE: Determine the proportion of vaccinated patients in a private 
hematology and internal medicine outpatient clinic and potential factors in 
adherence in at-risk patients (due to onco-hematological diseases).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This is a cross-sectional study of outpatients from a 
private clinic. We applied a non-validated instrument to all patients attending 
the outpatient clinic from May to October 2021. According to the primary 
diagnosis, we classified patients into onco-hematological and 
non-onco-hematological patients. Since national authorities exclusively executed 
and planned the rollout of vaccines, the order and eligibility defined by 
authorities of vaccination was considered when conducting the analysis and 
patients were classified according to the their corresponding group.
RESULTS: 397 participants were accrued, 269 (68%) had an onco-hematological 
condition. In the whole group, 73 (18.3%) had a history of infection. 
Vaccination history was present in 286 persons (72%); 82% had two doses. In the 
subset of 269 persons with an onco-hematological condition, 191 (71%) were 
vaccinated, whereas 95 participants with non-hematological conditions (73%) had 
received the vaccine. Vaccination status was associated with age (OR 1.07, 
95%CI: 1.03,1.10, p<0.0001) and body mass index (OR 1.11, 95%CI: 1.04,1.17, 
p<0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: According to our study, vaccination adherence at our center is 
significantly different from the nationwide proportion of vaccines.

DOI: 10.21149/13549
PMID: 36130363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Liver Int. 2020 Jun;40(6):1278-1281. doi: 10.1111/liv.14470.

COVID-19 and liver disease.

Sun J(1), Aghemo A(2)(3), Forner A(4), Valenti L(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Organ Failure Research, Guangdong Provincial Key 
Laboratory of Viral Hepatitis Research, Department of Infectious Diseases, 
Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Division of Internal Medicine and Hepatology, Department of Gastroenterology, 
Humanitas Clinical and Research Center IRCCS, Rozzano, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Pieve Emanuele, 
Italy.
(4)Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer group (BCLC), Liver Unit, Hospital Clínic of 
Barcelona, Fundació Clínic per a la Recerca Biomédica (FCRB), IDIBAPS, Centro de 
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas 
(CIBERehd), University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di 
Milano, Milan, Italy.
(6)Translational Medicine, Department of Transfusion Medicine and Hematology, 
Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico IRCCS, Milan, Italy.

Comment in
    Liver Int. 2020 Jul;40(7):1787-1788. doi: 10.1111/liv.14477.
    Liver Int. 2020 Nov;40(11):2877-2878. doi: 10.1111/liv.14570.
    Liver Int. 2021 Aug;41(8):1979-1980. doi: 10.1111/liv.14982.

DOI: 10.1111/liv.14470
PMID: 32251539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. JBRA Assist Reprod. 2020 Oct 6;24(4):394. doi: 10.5935/1518-0557.20200071.

SARS-COV-2 in Argentina.

Lancuba S(1)(2), Martinez AG(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Sociedad Argentina de Medicina Reproductiva (SAMeR) President of Sociedad 
Argentina de Medicina Reproductiva (SAMeR).
(2)CIMER Argentina Director of CIMER, Argentina.
(3)Red Latinoamericana de Reproducción Asistida (REDLARA) Vice President Red 
Latinoamericana de Reproducción Asistida (REDLARA).
(4)Laboratorio de Fertilis Medicina Reproductiva Argentina Director of 
Laboratorio de Fertilis Medicina Reproductiva, Argentina.

DOI: 10.5935/1518-0557.20200071
PMCID: PMC7558899
PMID: 32894013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Intern Med. 2012;51(18):2537-44. doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.51.7987. Epub 
2012 Sep 15.

Clinical characteristics of nursing and healthcare-associated pneumonia: a 
Japanese variant of healthcare-associated pneumonia.

Ishida T(1), Tachibana H, Ito A, Yoshioka H, Arita M, Hashimoto T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kurashiki Central Hospital, Japan. 
ishidat@kchnet.or.jp

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to describe the epidemiology, clinical 
features, antimicrobial treatment, and outcomes of patients with nursing and 
healthcare-associated pneumonia (NHCAP); a new category of pneumonia proposed by 
the Japanese Respiratory Society.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective analysis of a prospectively collected 
database of patients with NHCAP and community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) 
hospitalized at a single center between January 2008 and December 2010, and 
compared their clinical characteristics. The criteria for NHCAP were as follows: 
(1) residence in a nursing home or an extended-care ward, (2) a discharge from a 
hospital in the preceding 90 days, (3) an elderly or handicapped patient who 
needs long-term care, (4) a patient who regularly requires vascular access in an 
outpatient setting.
RESULTS: A total of 442 NHCAP patients and 451 CAP patients were evaluated. The 
NHCAP patients were older and had a higher frequency of underlying diseases. 
Aspiration was thought to be associated with the NHCAP in 63% of patients. 
Streptococcus pneumoniae was the leading pathogen in both groups, whereas the 
frequency of multidrug-resistant pathogens was higher in the NHCAP patients. The 
most frequently used antimicrobials in NHCAP patients were penicillins with 
beta-lactamase inhibitors. The in-hospital mortality and recurrence rates were 
significantly higher in NHCAP patients than in CAP patients (13.1% vs. 5.1%, 
p<0.001 and 18.8% vs. 5.5%, p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: The clinical picture of NHCAP is consistent with that of HCAP 
described in the past. It is thought to be of benefit to modify the 
healthcare-associated pneumonia (HCAP) criteria considering the healthcare and 
social health insurance system in Japan.

DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.51.7987
PMID: 22989823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Can Fam Physician. 2023 Jun;69(6):400-402. doi: 10.46747/cfp.6906400.

Antibiotic treatment duration for community-acquired pneumonia in children.

Singla S, Sih K, Goldman RD.

QUESTION: A 4-year-old child was seen in our clinic with a clinical presentation 
consistent with community-acquired pneumonia (CAP). He was prescribed oral 
amoxicillin and a colleague asked about the duration of treatment. What is the 
current available evidence for treatment duration for uncomplicated CAP in an 
outpatient setting?
ANSWER: Previously the recommended duration of antibiotic treatment of 
uncomplicated CAP was 10 days. Recent evidence from several randomized 
controlled trials suggests that a 3- to 5-day duration is noninferior to a 
longer treatment course. In an effort to prescribe the shortest effective 
duration of antibiotics to minimize the risk of antimicrobial resistance 
associated with prolonged antibiotic use, family physicians should offer 3 to 5 
days of appropriate antibiotics and monitor the recovery of children with CAP.

Copyright © 2023 the College of Family Physicians of Canada.

DOI: 10.46747/cfp.6906400
PMCID: PMC10266400
PMID: 37315974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Pediatrics. 2020 Aug;146(2):e20193690. doi: 10.1542/peds.2019-3690. Epub 2020 
Jul 2.

Opioids or Steroids for Pneumonia or Sinusitis.

Phang KG(1), Roberts JR(2), Ebeling M(2), Garner SS(2), Basco WT Jr(2).

Author information:
(1)Geisinger Medical Center, Danville, Pennsylvania; and kphang@geisinger.edu.
(2)Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina.

OBJECTIVES: To compare the frequency of opioid and corticosteroid prescriptions 
dispensed for children with pneumonia or sinusitis visits on the basis of 
location of care.
METHODS: We evaluated 2016 South Carolina Medicaid claims data for 5 to 18 years 
olds with pneumonia or sinusitis. Visits were associated with 1 of 3 locations: 
the emergency department (ED), urgent care, or the ambulatory setting.
RESULTS: Inclusion criteria were met by 31 838 children. Pneumonia visits were 
more often linked to an opioid prescription in the ED (34 of 542 [6.3%]) than in 
ambulatory settings (24 of 1590 [1.5%]; P ≤ .0001) and were more frequently 
linked to a steroid prescription in the ED (106 of 542 [19.6%]) than in 
ambulatory settings (196 of 1590 [12.3%]; P ≤ .0001). Sinusitis visits were more 
often linked to an opioid prescription in the ED (202 of 2705 [7.5%]) than in 
ambulatory settings (568 of 26 866 [2.1%]; P ≤ .0001) and were more frequently 
linked to a steroid prescription in the ED (510 of 2705 [18.9%]) than in 
ambulatory settings (1922 of 26 866 [7.2%]; P ≤ .0001). In logistic regression 
for children with pneumonia, the ED setting was associated with increased odds 
of receiving an opioid (adjusted odds ratio [aOR] 4.69) or steroid (aOR 1.67). 
Similarly, patients with sinusitis were more likely to be prescribed opioids 
(aOR 4.02) or steroids (aOR 3.05) in the ED than in ambulatory sites.
CONCLUSIONS: School-aged children received opioid and steroid prescriptions for 
pneumonia or sinusitis at a higher frequency in the ED versus the ambulatory 
setting.

Copyright © 2020 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2019-3690
PMCID: PMC7397734
PMID: 32616629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors have 
indicated they have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose.


8. J Genet Couns. 2024 Feb;33(1):135-141. doi: 10.1002/jgc4.1879. Epub 2024 Feb
12.

Clinical Bootcamp: Moving toward competency outside of the clinic.

Dugan RB(1), Yashar BM(1), Marvin M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Genetic Counseling Program, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

The COVID-19 Pandemic placed many challenges on the healthcare system. As 
healthcare providers were stretched thin and clinics were closed to any 
non-essential personnel, including learners, educational programs across the 
country scrambled to meet the needs of their students. In response to 
restrictions placed on traditional in-person clinical training, the University 
of Michigan Genetic Counseling Program (UMGCP) designed a Clinical Bootcamp 
(Bootcamp); a two-weeklong, blended educational activity using a framework of 
case-based learning (CBL) (McLean, 2016). Journal of Medical Education and 
Curricular Development, 3, JMECD.S20377). Herein is a description of the theory 
behind the design as well as specific details of the activities and evaluations 
to aid implementation and ideas for future applications. Activities developed 
for the Clinical Bootcamp retain relevance when clinical sites and experienced 
clinical supervisors are limited resources. We believe the Bootcamp can serve as 
a tool to expedite the transition of clinical skills to a new setting, allowing 
students to engage more fully upon entering a new clinical space, leading to 
optimal use of supervisors' time and experience, and allowing students to 
maximize the benefit of their time in clinic.

© 2024 The Authors. Journal of Genetic Counseling published by Wiley Periodicals 
LLC on behalf of National Society of Genetic Counselors.

DOI: 10.1002/jgc4.1879
PMID: 38344862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Diabetes Technol Ther. 2023 Feb;25(S1):S2-S14. doi: 10.1089/dia.2023.2501.

Virtual Clinics for Diabetes Care.

Garg SK(1), Almurashi AM(1), Rodriguez E(1).

Author information:
(1)Barbara Davis Center for Diabetes, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA.

DOI: 10.1089/dia.2023.2501
PMID: 36802190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Mayo Clin Proc. 2022 Dec;97(12):2184-2185. doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2022.10.016.
 Epub 2022 Oct 31.

Ambulatory Remote Patient Monitoring Beyond COVID-19: Engagement and Sustainment 
Considerations.

Gunderson M(1), Melton GB(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN; Institute 
for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
(2)Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN; Institute 
for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN; Center for 
Learning Health Systems Sciences, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN. 
Electronic address: gmelton@umn.edu.

Comment on
    Mayo Clin Proc. 2022 Dec;97(12):2215-2225. doi: 
10.1016/j.mayocp.2022.08.015.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2022.10.016
PMCID: PMC9618433
PMID: 36464459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]